Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 157–158

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Strategic Information Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jsis

Editorial
Welcome to the third issue of Volume 25 of the Journal of Strategic Information Systems. This issue contains three research articles contributing to the strategic issues in the ﬁeld of Information Systems and two commentaries. As is customary, our authors represent different continents and countries. The central themes in this issue include strategic resources in information systems development projects and management, as well as the effective usage of information systems. Strategic resources may involve knowledge or developer attention, dispositional elements, or organizational climate resources among others. Our ﬁrst article in this issue of JSIS is by Sherae Daniel (University of Cincinnati, USA) and Katherine Stewart (University of Maryland, USA). Titled ‘‘Open source project success: resource access, ﬂow, and integration,” the paper examines resources from both collaboration and competition point of view in open source projects. The paper focuses on two key resources needed for technical success – knowledge and developer attention – ﬂowing for the project and ﬂowing away from the project to other projects in the network. The paper examines a project’s technical success in terms of completed code modiﬁcations. The paper leverages knowledge sharing and integration literature, structural complexity concepts, network effects, and attention theory to advance hypotheses that are tested in a sample of 175 open source projects. The authors found that developers’ attention devoted to other projects negatively impacts completed code modiﬁcations. The results suggest that network degree centrality increases access to knowledge and attention resources and positively impacts completed code modiﬁcations. The OSS projects beneﬁt from network degree centrality but suffer when developer attention is diffused to outside projects. Our second article in this issue is titled, ‘‘Expectable use: An important facet of IT usage” and is by Isabelle Walsh (SKEMA Business School, France, France), Mireille Gettler-Summa (Paris-Dauphine University, France) and Michel Kalika (IAE Lyon School of Management, France and Business Science Institute, Luxembourg). Here, the authors report a study that is part of a broader research project about IT acculturation. The authors motivate the paper to argue that IT usage literature has grown more multidimensional and multifaceted. The authors develop a new construct: expectable use. Expectable use is deﬁned ‘‘as a dispositional facet of IT usage that may evolve over time, depending on training and context.” The construct captures the IT usage elements in a proactive and a self-determined manner and generalizes beyond any speciﬁc IT use (software or digital device). The construct includes ‘‘affective, cognitive and behavioral elements that result from both individual and group factors.” The study deploys mixed methods to develop the construct and quantitative index to assess this dispositional facet of IT usage. The paper stimulates future research by advancing propositions for the new construct. The paper’s practical implications include fostering diffusion of IT within organizations by identifying possible ‘‘ambassadors” for a system to realize its value in the organization. Turning now to our third article, this is by Paul Benjamin Lowry (The University of Hong Kong, China) and David Wilson (The University of Arizona, USA) and is titled ‘‘Creating agile organizations through IT: The inﬂuence of internal IT service perceptions on IT service quality and IT agility.” In highly turbulent environments, IT agility has grown more important and warrants further research. In their paper, the authors extend the nomological net of the IT climate research to investigate how service climate and service quality inﬂuence organizational IT agility from the view point of IT employees. It is of strategic importance to understand how service climate impacts agility, as it has become a key element of business value. The study examines IT service climate as an important organizational contextual resource for IT agility. IT service climate is evaluated from IT employees’ perceptions of IT service. For this reason, the reconceptualized IT service construct has been renamed ‘‘internal IT service perceptions.” The paper reviews work on IT Service Climate, IT Service Quality, and IT Agility and their underlying conceptual and theoretical underpinnings. The study theorizes about IT service climate from the viewpoint of individual perceptions and surveys an online panel of IT employees (including employees, managers, and executives and represents professional respondents in the United States). Unlike the previous operationalization of IT service climate as ‘‘shared” perceptions amongst samples of IT employees in the same department, the authors evaluated IT employees’ perceptions of IT service. For this reason, they named their reconceptualized IT service construct ‘‘internal IT service
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2016.08.004 0963-8687/Ó 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V.

158

Editorial / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 157–158

perceptions.” The study ﬁnds internal IT service perceptions positively inﬂuences IT agility, both directly and indirectly, through facilitating positive IT service quality. The study contributes to the literature by highlighting the importance of a positive, service-oriented climate in providing services to the rest of the organization. The authors underscore that internal IT service perceptions are inherently personnel-focused—as opposed to technology- or infrastructure-focused—and IT managers can greatly beneﬁt from acknowledging the role of their IT employees in providing value to the organization. Both inrole and extra-role behaviors can contribute to a favorable service climate. We also have a commentary on the above research article ‘‘Creating agile organizations through IT: The inﬂuence of IT service climate on IT service quality and IT agility” by Ronnie Jia (Illinois State University, USA) and Blaize Horner Reich (Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada). The authors of this commentary developed and validated the original IT Service Climate construct upon which Lowry and Wilson build upon. In building on this work, Lowry and Wilson deviate from prior work in a couple of different ways including the individual level of analysis (rather than the aggregate level) and the use of online survey panel (rather than an organizational sample). The commentary focuses on the implications for IT service climate speciﬁcally and strategic IS research more generally. Finally, we have a response to this commentary: ‘‘‘Cargo Cult’ science in traditional organization and information systems survey research: A case for using nontraditional methods of data collection, including Mechanical Turk and online panels” by Paul Benjamin Lowry (The University of Hong Kong, China), John D’Arcy (University of Delaware, USA), Bryan Hammer (Oklahoma State University, USA), and Gregory D. Moody (University of Nevada-Las Vegas, USA). The authors respond to the commentary and speciﬁcally address the reconceptualized IT service construct and the use of Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk). Collectively, the two commentaries call for more research and debate with a view to better understanding of how the use of online panels constitute a productive strategy in IS research. We also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the winner and runner up of the JSIS Best Paper Award for 2015. Both papers address highly practically strategic issues and make signiﬁcant novel contribution to the discipline of information systems. Congratulations to the authors of these outstanding papers. The best JSIS paper of 2015 was: Design for Social Media Engagement: Insights from Elderly Volume 24, Issue 2, June 2015, Pages 128–145 Paolo Spagnoletti, Andrea Resca, Øystein Sæbø And the runner up was: The tension between business process modelling and ﬂexibility: Revealing multiple dimensions with a sociomaterial approach Volume 24, Issue 3, September 2015, Pages 189–202 João Porto de Albuquerque, Marcel Christ. We are arranging for these articles to be made available free of charge over the coming months and invite you to take advantage of this free access. We hope you enjoy the articles in this issue and the winning articles. We welcome any feedback including lively debates about the commentaries. With best wishes R.D. Galliers Bentley University, USA Loughborough University, UK Sirkka L. Jarvenpaa The University of Texas at Austin, USA

