Journal of Management Information Systems

ISSN: 0742-1222 (Print) 1557-928X (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/mmis20

The Effects of IT-Enabled Cognitive Stimulation Tools on Creative Problem Solving: A Dual Pathway to Creativity
Niek Althuizen & Astrid Reichel
To cite this article: Niek Althuizen & Astrid Reichel (2016) The Effects of IT-Enabled Cognitive Stimulation Tools on Creative Problem Solving: A Dual Pathway to Creativity, Journal of Management Information Systems, 33:1, 11-44, DOI: 10.1080/07421222.2016.1172439 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2016.1172439

Published online: 17 Jun 2016.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 174

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=mmis20 Download by: [Bibliotheek TU Delft] Date: 14 February 2017, At: 09:07

The Effects of IT-Enabled Cognitive Stimulation Tools on Creative Problem Solving: A Dual Pathway to Creativity
NIEK ALTHUIZEN AND ASTRID REICHEL
NIEK ALTHUIZEN (althuizen@essec.edu) is associate professor in the Department of Marketing, ESSEC Business School, Paris. He holds a master’s degree in agricultural economics from Wageningen University (Netherlands) and a Ph.D. in marketing from the Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University. His research focuses on decision making and decision support, with a special interest in creativity. His work has been published in the Journal of Management Information Systems, Decision Support Systems, American Sociological Review, Creativity Research Journal, Marketing Letters, and Psychology and Marketing. ASTRID REICHEL (astrid.reichel@sbg.ac.at; corresponding author) is a full professor and head of the Human Resource Management Group at the University of Salzburg, Austria. She earned her Ph.D. in social and economic sciences from the University of Vienna, Austria. Her research focuses on micro-aspects of human resources management (HRM), especially on building creativity-fostering environments for employees in organizations and on macro-questions of HRM, such as power and organization of HR departments. Her articles have been published in Decision Support Systems, Human Resource Management, HRM Review, and International Journal of HRM. ABSTRACT: We investigate the effectiveness of three types of IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools for enhancing creative problem solving: mind mappers, process guides, and stimuli providers. Based on the dual pathway to creativity models, the authors examine the extent to which these tools are capable of stimulating individuals to explore their knowledge base more deeply (i.e., the persistence pathway) and more broadly (i.e., the flexibility pathway) and, hence, help to produce more novel ideas. In a laboratory study with business students, they find that, as compared to unaided individuals, IT-enabled stimuli providers enhance individual creativity more than process guides and mind mappers. As for the underlying creative process, stimuli providers push individuals to explore their knowledge base more deeply and more broadly, leading to more novel but, unexpectedly, also more useful ideas. The reported findings may facilitate the development of creativity support systems and their assignment to individuals and tasks.

Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www. tandfonline.com/mmis.
Journal of Management Information Systems / 2016, Vol. 33, No. 1, pp. 11–44. Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC ISSN 0742–1222 (print) / ISSN 1557–928X (online) DOI: 10.1080/07421222.2016.1172439

12

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

KEY WORDS AND PHRASES: creativity, creative problem solving, creativity stimulation, dual pathway to creativity, IT-enabled cognitive stimulation, knowledge activation, search for ideas in associative memory (SIAM).

To accommodate the growing need for creativity in business [39], information systems researchers have set out to develop creativity support systems (CSS, see [33]), which intend to stretch the creative boundaries of human problem-solvers. Creativity—commonly defined as the production of something that is both novel (or original) and useful (or meaningful) (e.g., [3, 21, 71])—enables organizations to cope with highly competitive and dynamic environments and changing customer needs [4, 79]. Creativity in the workplace necessitates three main input factors: intrinsic motivation, domain-relevant knowledge (i.e., technical, procedural, and intellectual knowledge), and creative thinking abilities [4]. Most existing creativity support systems (e.g. [2, 18, 26]) focus on the knowledge component. That is, these systems either supplement individuals or groups with an external knowledge base or stimulate a more thorough exploration and exploitation of internal knowledge bases (see [48]). The main assumption underlying this approach for boosting creativity is that the first ideas people generate are usually the most obvious ones based on easily accessible knowledge [59, 62]. This is known as the path of least resistance phenomenon [74]. Too much reliance on easily accessible knowledge or more conventional lines of thought is not likely to lead to the most creative ideas or solutions [59]. Hence, cognitively stimulating people to leave the path of least resistance should help to produce more creative solutions [25, 48]. The primary concern for IS researchers has been to investigate the effectiveness of ITenabled cognitive stimulation tools for enhancing creativity at the individual, team, and organizational levels. However, the question as to how these tools influence the underlying cognitive processes has received less attention (see the observations of Seidel, MüllerWienbergen, and Becker [65] based on a review of CSS research published between 1991 and 2009). By focusing on the role of knowledge activation for enhancing individual creativity, this article builds on and extends prior research by providing more insight into the underlying cognitive processes. Firmly grounded in cognitive psychology and support by empirical research, the “dual pathway to creativity” theory [24, 51] offers a compelling framework to study these underlying process. The theory discerns the following pathways via which three types of IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools—mind mappers, process guides, and stimuli providers—can influence creative problem solving: (1) by increasing cognitive persistence, that is, stimulating a deeper exploration of one’s knowledge base, and (2) by increasing cognitive flexibility, that is, stimulating a broader exploration of one’s knowledge base. A better understanding of how these tools establish their effects is important for the development of effective CSS and their assignment to individuals and tasks. In sum, this article sets out to (1) investigate the effectiveness of different types of IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools for enhancing the creative output of

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

13

individuals, and (2) provide insight into how these tools establish their alleged effects. More specifically, we study their impact on users’ exploration of their knowledge base, that is, whether or not the tools stimulate a deeper and/or broader search for ideas in associative memory. To test our hypotheses, we conducted a laboratory experiment with 143 business students, who were asked to creatively solve a business problem with the help of one of the following IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools: a “mind mapper,” a “process guide,” or a “stimuli provider” (these tools will be discussed in more detail later). To assess the net effects of these tools, we controlled for the influence of individual differences in creative ability and motivation. We then discuss the implications of our findings for theory and practice.

Creative Problem Solving
Open-ended, weakly structured problems that require creative solutions [49, 58], such as developing inventive marketing campaigns, new products, or business strategies, come with a vast range of possible solutions [11, 73]. Creative problem solving is typically conceived as an iterative process that comprises the following phases: problem presentation, problem preparation, idea generation, idea evaluation, idea selection, and idea implementation (see [3, 8]). Most models of creative cognition roughly distinguish between generative or divergent thinking processes, which serve to generate many and diverse ideas (fostering the novelty dimension of creativity), and explorative or convergent thinking processes, which serve to evaluate, select, and work out the most promising ideas (fostering the usefulness dimension of creativity) [3, 32, 48]. CSS research and development (see [48]) has focused primarily on stimulating divergent thinking, while less attention has been paid to stimulating convergent thinking. Ideally, IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools should support both types of thinking to help produce solutions that are both novel and useful (see [48]). To better understand how these tools can influence the outcomes of the creative problem-solving process, more detailed insight into the underlying cognitive processes is needed.

The Search for Ideas in Associative Memory
Theory When people are asked to solve problems creatively, one of the first things they will do is to search their memory for existing knowledge that is relevant to the task at hand. As Ward [76, p. 176] puts it: “creative ideas do not appear, ex nihilo, fullblown in the mind of their originators, but rather must be crafted from the person’s existing knowledge.” The search for ideas in associative memory (SIAM) model [52] conceptualizes this as a two-stage process: (1) a knowledge activation phase, in which relevant existing knowledge is activated and retrieved from long-term memory, and (2) an idea production phase, in which the retrieved knowledge from longterm memory is recombined or applied in novel ways in short-term working memory

14

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

(which has limited capacity). Associative models of long-term memory (e.g. [5, 16, 57]) posit that it is organized based on associations that we develop during our lives between concepts, beliefs, objects, and images, which together form a rich knowledge network consisting of “many associations, levels, and categories” [53, p. 536]. The strength of an association (e.g., between “Usain Bolt” and “speed”) is largely determined by the frequency of its use, which enhances the accessibility of the association in long-term memory [59]. To retrieve relevant knowledge from long-term memory, elements of the problem definition will be used as search cues [53]. For example, given the problem of how to convey the speed of a computer ’s hard disk in an advertisement, the search cue “speed” will activate associated knowledge in long-term memory and this activation is said to spread in memory [16, 62], such that strong associations between concepts (e.g., “speed” → “Usain Bolt” → track running) are activated more easily than weaker associations (e.g., “speed” → “Usain Bolt” → “cricket”; although Bolt used to play cricket, not many people will know this, and for those who know, it will not be easily accessible or “top of mind”). The activated knowledge, if not discarded as irrelevant for solving the problem, then enters working memory to serve as raw material for producing ideas by combining existing knowledge elements in a novel way or by applying existing knowledge to a new domain [46, 53, 78]). Those new ideas, in turn, can serve as search cues for retrieving additional knowledge from long-term memory, which could lead to a “train of thought,” that is, an accumulation of ideas that are closely related [51]. However, ideas that are based on easily accessible knowledge that is strongly associated with the search cue(s) are not likely to be very novel [59, 62, 74]. In contrast, following a path of weaker associations can lead to unexpected, more novel ideas. That is, an idea based on weaker associations with knowledge that is conceptually more remote or distant from the target problem is likely to be less obvious and more original [46], but this may come at the expense of the usefulness of the idea.

Illustration The aforementioned problem definition of how to convey the speed of a computer’s hard disk in an advertisement could, for example, elicit the following train of thought based on strong associations: speed → Usain Bolt → track running → 100m. The result could be an advertisement that features a picture of track runners approaching the 100m finish line (example based on an actual ad for a Samsung hard disk). However, to convey the speed of a cordless screwdriver, for example, following a path of weaker associations, such as speed → Usain Bolt → cricket → insects, could result in an advertisement that features a picture in which a fly’s leg is screwed to a wooden table (example based on an actual ad for a cordless screwdriver manufactured by Bosch). Although arguably more original, the success of an advertisement that is based on weak associations depends on the viewer’s ability to identify what the product (a cordless screwdriver) and the remote conveyer (a fly) have in common [6, 61], in this case “speed.” In other words, using a weaker

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

15

association to convey the speed of a product may be more original, but less effective than a stronger association.

Dual Pathway to Creativity
Theory Due to its associative nature and the spreading of activation in long-term memory, people will be able to rapidly generate a number of ideas within a few categories that are closely related to the problem definition (e.g., conveying the speed of a product by associating it with other fast products, such as rockets, F1 cars, bullet trains, etc.). If the cognitive effort to produce additional ideas within these categories becomes too high (due to weaker associations), people may switch perspectives and explore more remotely related categories (for example, animals, such as cheetahs and gazelles, or cartoon characters, such as Superman or the Road Runner), or simply stop generating ideas [52]. However, once easily accessible knowledge has been activated, people often have difficulty switching perspectives in order to search for ideas within other categories, and more remote ones in particular (see [35]), known as “cognitive inertia” (see [41]). For example, when asked to draw a new type of alien, people tend to incorporate features of creatures that live on earth (e.g., wings, eyes, legs, etc.), even when they are explicitly instructed not to do so (see [44]). The tendency of humans to follow strong associations, taking a path of least resistance, causes unaided individuals to search for ideas primarily within easily accessible areas of their knowledge base (see [11]), which is unlikely to produce highly novel ideas. To produce more novel ideas, the dual pathway to creativity theory [24, 51] posits that people need to be stimulated to be either more persistent in their exploration of their knowledge base, that is, to go beyond the most obvious ideas in a specific category (increasing the depth of exploration), or to be more flexible, that is, to search for ideas within a broader range of categories, including more remote ones (increasing the breadth of exploration). Increasing the depth or breadth of one’s search for ideas has been shown to result in a larger number of generated ideas as well as more novel ones, which are not necessarily more useful [51, 59]. The dual pathway theory does not make predictions about the usefulness of the generated ideas (see [51]). However, usefulness is as important as novelty for creative business solutions [19, 31]. The usefulness of the generated ideas can be increased when knowledge is activated that is strongly associated with the target problem, as this knowledge is typically more applicable to the problem (e.g., when one uses previous marketing campaigns for beer brands as a source of inspiration for developing a new campaign for a beer brand; see [2]). Usefulness can also be enhanced by the provision of support for convergent thinking processes during the idea production stage of the SIAM mode, which are necessary to screen and evaluate novel ideas in terms of their usefulness for solving the target problem. This is particularly important when the ideas are based on knowledge that is weakly associated with the target problem (e.g.,

16

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

when one uses previous marketing campaigns for cars or insurance products as a source of inspiration for developing a new campaign for a beer brand; see [2]).

Illustration Consider, for example, that Apple sets out to improve the navigation of its latest iPhone without compromising on sleekness and user-friendliness. An example of the persistence pathway is to dig deeper for ideas within the category of touch or haptic feedback. Accordingly, Apple could come up with the idea to improve the iPhone’s navigation with a technique that also recognizes the amount of pressure applied to the screen. An example of the flexibility pathway, that is, to broaden the search for ideas, is to generate ideas that are based on speech recognition (as in Siri), eyetracking, or brainwave detection technologies. Using knowledge from the latter domains is likely to require “mental leaps” [38, 75] to produce ideas that fit within the confines of the iPhone concept (price, size, design, etc.). Although such ideas are likely to be perceived as more original, they may be less useful or practical than ideas that build on knowledge that is more closely related to the target problem.

IT-Enabled Cognitive Stimulation Tools
To stretch the boundaries set by the activated knowledge based on the problem definition, IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools can be used to push people to explore a larger part of their knowledge base [50], thereby enhancing creativity [59, 69]. Table 1 presents a selection of studies, published in major information systems (IS) journals between 1990 and 2014, which investigated the effects of IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools on individual creative problem solving. The table contains information about the study’s participants, the IT-enabled tools that were used, and the observed effects of the tools on the creativity of the outcome. Table 1 illustrates that, among the studied IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools, “stimuli providers” are most common, followed by “process guides” and “mind mappers.” This observation largely corresponds to other studies, such as Knoll and Horton’s [40] categorization of the 101 “active ingredients” of idea-generation techniques identified by Smith [69] (36 percent of these ingredients involve cognitive stimulation by providing stimuli, and it is noteworthy that 44 percent of them “do not guide mental activities at all” [40, p. 101]). Table 1 further shows that most studies investigated the effectiveness of the IT-enabled tools relative to a baseline condition, while controlling for individual differences in creative potential. However, the ways in which these tools influence the underlying cognitive processes that lead to creative outcomes have not received much attention, that is, beyond studying the effects on cognitive fluency (i.e., the number of generated ideas). Drawing on the search for ideas in associative memory and dual pathway theory, in the next section we discuss the working of the three types of IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools and develop hypotheses regarding their effects on the creative

Table 1. A Selection of Prior Research on IT-Enabled Cognitive Stimulation Tools for Supporting Individual Creative Problem Solving

IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tool N
44 Students Selfreported creativity (CTI) 1 - Ideatree (mind mapper) - IdeaFisher (stimuli provider) - Harvard Graphics processor (control) - Paper and Pencil (control)

Study

Subjects

Ind. difference # Creativity support systems (type of measures* Tasks cognitive stimulation) Observed effects

Mind mapper

Massetti (1996) [45]

Process guide

Elam and Mead (1990) [30]

12

Working professionals

Selfreported creativity (ACL)

2

Both the IdeaFisher stimuli provider and the Ideatree mind mapper helped to produce more creative ideas (average of novelty and usefulness) - ods/Consultant version 1 (process The ods/ guide) Consultant - ods/Consultant version 2 (process (version 1) guide) process guide - Paper and Pencil (control) helped to produce more creative ideas (continues)

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS 17

18

Table 1. Continued

IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tool N
40 Working Selfprofessionals and reported students creativity (ACL) 1 - Ods/Consultant Version 1 (process guide) - Paper and Pencil (control)

Study

Subjects

Ind. difference # Creativity support systems (type of measures* Tasks cognitive stimulation) Observed effects

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

Marakas and Elam (1997) [43]

Stimuli provider

Satzinger, Garfield, and Nagasundaram (1999) [63]

185

Students

-

1

The ods/ Consultant (version 1) process guide helped to produce more creative ideas - EBS (Electronic Brainstorming): with The EBT stimulus closely-related stimuli (i.e., provider with paradigm preserving) (stimuli remote stimuli provider) helped to - EBS: with remote stimuli (i.e., produce a larger paradigm number of modifying) (stimuli provider) creative ideas (i.e., paradigm modifying) than the one with closely related stimuli.

MacCrimmon and Wagner (1994) [42]

48 Students

-

3

- GENI (stimuli provider) - Word Processor (control)

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

Garfield et al. (2001) 219 [34]

Students

Selfreported creativity (CTI, KAI, MBTI)

1

- Force Field Analysis (stimuli provider) - Guided Fantasy (stimuli provider) (both were combined with closely related (i.e., paradigm preserving) versus remote stimuli (i.e., paradigm modifying)

The GENI stimuli provider helped to produce more novel, more useful and overall more creative ideas (weighted average of novelty and usefulness) The Guided Fantasy stimuli provider as well as the provision of more remote/ novel stimuli helped produce a larger number of creative ideas (i.e., paradigm modifying) than Force Field Analysis or closely related stimuli. (continues)

19

20

Table 1. Continued

IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tool N
240 Students 2

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

Study

Subjects

Ind. difference # Creativity support systems (type of measures* Tasks cognitive stimulation) Observed effects

Santanen, Briggs, and De Vreede (2004) [62]

Althuizen and Wierenga (2014) [2]

120

Students

Creative ability test (ATTA)

1

- EBS: with different types of stimuli The EBT stimuli (topic provider helped changing or not) (stimuli provider) or to produce a - EBS: with no stimuli provided larger number of (control) creative ideas as well as more creative ideas. - CBR (Case-Based Reasoning): with The CBR stimuli various numbers (few vs. many) and provider types of stimuli (closely-related, (containing a remote large number of vs. both) (stimuli provider) both closely related and remote stimuli) helped produce more novel, more useful and overall more creative ideas.

Notes: *ACL = adjective checklist; CTI = creative thought and innovative action inventory; KTI = Kirton adaptor-innovator scale; MBTI = Myers–Briggs-type indicator; ATTA = abbreviated Torrance test for adults.

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

21

process and its outcomes. This is followed by a description of our empirical study, which aims to (1) investigate the effects of the three types of IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools on both the novelty and the usefulness of the generated ideas, as compared to unaided individuals, and (2) provide insight into whether or not these tools stimulate cognitive fluency (i.e., the number of ideas), persistence (i.e., the depth of exploration), and flexibility (i.e., the breadth of exploration).

Hypotheses Development Mapping the Mind
Mind mapping is a technique that asks individuals to make their associations with the target problem explicit, by drawing a map with associations either on paper or on a computer. Developed in the context of Ausubel’s [7] learning theory, the original purpose of mind maps is to support meaningful learning (as opposed to rote learning). Meaningful learning means that new information can be related to existing concepts in mind, for which the individual has already developed an understanding and an associative network with other concepts [7]. However, people have argued that mind maps can also support creative problem solving (e.g., [14, 29]). We propose that the alleged positive effect of IT-enabled mind mappers on creative problem solving is primarily established during the knowledge activation phase of the SIAM model, by enlarging the set of associations that can serve as raw material for producing ideas. That is, we expect that the simple act of being asked to lay out a mind map, will stimulate a more thorough exploration of one’s associative memory—beyond the knowledge that is top of mind—because it is strongly associated with the problem definition. In addition, as working memory has limited capacity, the created mind map serves as a reminder of the knowledge retrieved from long-term memory. Empirical research has demonstrated that the activation of relevant knowledge, prior to generating ideas, leads to more novel ideas as a result of a more persistent search for ideas within (pre-)activated knowledge structures (i.e., by increasing the depth of exploration) [59]. Because mind maps offer little to stimulate individuals to switch perspectives and explore less accessible, more remote areas of their knowledge base, we expect that IT-enabled mind mappers mainly exert their influence on the novelty of the ideas via the depth of exploration and that the effect via the breadth of exploration will be limited or nonexistent) (e.g. [12, 60]). As for the usefulness of the ideas, we expect that generating ideas based on easily accessible knowledge or strong associations in memory will produce ideas that are more useful as compared to ideas generated based on less accessible, more remote knowledge or weaker associations [2]. However, since unaided individuals are likely to generate ideas based on strong associations with the problem definition, following a path of least resistance, we do not expect their ideas to be less useful than those generated by users of a mind mapper tool, also because mind mappers do not

22

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

provide support for convergent thinking in the idea production phase of the SIAM model. Thus, we formulate the following hypotheses: Hypothesis 1a: IT-enabled “mind mappers” cognitively stimulate individuals to produce more novel ideas, as compared to unaided individuals. Hypothesis 1b: The positive effect of IT-enabled “mind mappers” on the novelty of the ideas is the result of a deeper exploration of the solution space (due to cognitive persistence).

Guiding the Process
Process guides cognitively stimulate individuals by walking them through all phases of the creative process. By probing the user with questions in each step of the process (see the method section for an example), IT-enabled process guides provide support in both stages of the SIAM model, that is, knowledge activation (stimulating divergent thinking) and idea production (stimulating convergent thinking). Rietzschel, Nijstad, and Stroebe [59] have shown that simply asking questions related to the problem definition, prior to generating ideas, activates relevant knowledge in memory, thereby stimulating individuals to explore the activated knowledge structures more deeply (cognitive persistence), which positively influences the novelty of the solutions (see [59]). Similar to mind mappers, process guides do not actively stimulate cognitive flexibility (by pushing individuals to switch perspectives and consider sources of ideas that are more remotely associated with the target problem) and, hence, we do not expect a significant impact on the breadth of exploration. Process guides, however, ensure that attention will be paid to each stage of the creative process, including the idea production phase of the SIAM model. As compared to unaided individuals, we therefore expect that users of process guides not only produce more novel ideas, by increasing the depth of exploration, but also more useful ones, by stimulating convergent thinking in the idea production phase. Hypothesis 2a: IT-enabled “process guides” cognitively stimulate individuals to produce more novel as well as more useful ideas, as compared to unaided individuals. Hypothesis 2b: The positive effect of IT-enabled “process guides” on the novelty of the ideas is the result of a deeper exploration of the solution space (due to cognitive persistence).

Providing Stimuli
Stimuli providers expose the individual to words, sentences, pictures, or even poems in order to provide additional cues to search associative memory for relevant knowledge [53], that is, beyond the knowledge activated by the cues that are part of the

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

23

problem description. Massetti [45], for example, provided individuals with an ITenabled “dictionary of associations” and found positive effects on the creativity of the ideas, but—as for the other stimuli provider studies listed in Table 1—she did not investigate the underlying cognitive processes via which the stimuli provider established its effects. Whether the provided stimuli trigger cognitive persistence or cognitive flexibility will depend on the nature of the stimuli, which is their conceptual distance or remoteness from the target problem (cf. [2, 10]). Remote stimuli will activate less accessible knowledge, inciting a broader exploration of the individual’s knowledge base (cognitive flexibility), while stimuli closely related to the target problem may stimulate a deeper exploration (cognitive persistence). Thus, whether the IT-enabled stimuli provider increases the novelty of the ideas via a deeper and/or broader exploration is likely to depend on the nature of the provided stimuli [48, 59]. As argued earlier, we expect that closely related stimuli are likely to lead to more useful ideas than remote stimuli, because the greater conceptual distance of the latter requires more cognitive effort to relate them to the target problem in a meaningful way (see [2, 75]). However, as compared to unaided individuals (who are likely to generate ideas based on strongly associated knowledge), we do not expect users of stimuli providers to produce more useful ideas, also because stimuli providers do not provide support for convergent thinking in the idea production phase of the SIAM model. Hypothesis 3a: IT-enabled “stimuli providers” cognitively stimulate individuals to produce more novel ideas, as compared to unaided individuals. Hypothesis 3b: The positive effect of IT-enabled “stimuli providers” on the novelty of the ideas is the result of a deeper and broader exploration of the solution space (due to cognitive persistence and flexibility). The formulated hypotheses concern the novelty and usefulness of the generated ideas. The ultimate dependent variable, however, is the creativity of the ideas, comprising both their novelty and usefulness. Hence, in the empirical study we will also report the results for the overall creativity of the ideas.

Method Study Design and Participants
The study deployed a 1 x 4 (IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tool: mind mapper, process guide, stimuli provider, or no tool) between-subjects experimental design. Participants were recruited among 184 master ’s students enrolled in a business course at an Austrian university. In return for a small monetary reward, 145 students volunteered to participate. For the participating students, the experiment represented an opportunity to use their knowledge and skills in a task related to creativity; a topic much talked about but much less practiced at business schools. The participants were randomly assigned to the experimental conditions. Two participants were excluded

24

Table 2. Means, Standard Deviations and Correlations between the Study’s Main Variables M (SD) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

5.9 6.40 6.6 .96** .64** .56** .87** .10 .70** .72** .65** .57** .89** 1.9 5.1 9.8 (0.67) (1.70) (5.74) .63** .59** .89**

(4.59) (4.33) (4.66)

.87** .92**

.17* .04 .11 –

Outcome variables 1. Number of novel ideas 2. Number of useful ideas 3. Number of creative ideas Process variables 4. Average depth of exploration (persistence)a 5. Breadth of exploration (flexibility) 6. Number of ideas (fluency) Individual differences (controls) 7. Divergent thinking ability (0–40) 8. Openness to experience (1–5) 9. Intrinsic motivationb(1–5) IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools 10. Mind mapper (N = 69)c 11. Process guide (N = 65)c 12. Stimuli provider (N = 67)c 23 3.8 3.9 .18 .25* .41** .29* .37** .45** .27* .36** .51** (4.98) (0.50) (0.81) .26** .12 –.08 .33** .10 .00 .29** .11 –.04 .16 .02 –.10 .16 .27* .34** .17* .07 .05 .01 .08 .21 .25** .07 –.07 .22 .31* .39*

–.01 .19 .10

.02 –.17 –.01

–.29* –.01 –.34**

N = 143. *p < .05, **p < .01; two-tailed p-values. a The correlation between average depth and highest depth is .86 (p < .01). b Intrinsic motivation was measured after the task. c Sample sizes include the baseline condition of “no cognitive stimulation tool” (N = 29).

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

25

from the analyses (one was an outlier with 68 ideas generated [> 7 std’s above the mean], while the other one had incomplete data). The remaining 143 observations were distributed as follows: “mind mapper” (N = 40), “process guide” (N = 36), “stimuli provider” (N = 38), and “no stimulation” (N = 29). The participants were between eighteen and forty-nine years old, with an average of twenty-two years (SD = 3.5). Age and gender (57 percent female) were proportionately distributed across the experimental conditions (gender: χ2(3) = 3.32, p = .35; age: F (3, 138) = .23, p = .88). Participants were asked to solve MacCrimmon and Wagner ’s [42] “improving an ailing donut franchise” problem. Since donuts are less common in the country where the experiment was conducted, we replaced the word “donuts” with “sandwiches.” The task read as follows: You are the co-owner of an established company that sells eight kinds of sandwiches. Like your main competitor, you are open from 8AM to 9PM. You advertise that you do not sell sandwiches that are more than three hours old. Hence, after three hours, the old sandwiches have to be replaced by freshly made ones. The display case with the sandwiches is kept full at all times in order to attract customers. An inquiry has shown that 50 percent of all sandwiches are sold from 9AM to 1PM. As a consequence, many sandwiches have to be disposed of during the remaining opening hours. A huge part of the sales revenues currently have to be used to cover the raw material expenses for the disposed sandwiches, instead of increasing profit. Please think of different courses of action to reach the goal of using a smaller share of the revenues to cover the costs of disposed sandwiches.

Treatments: IT-Enabled Cognitive Stimulation Tools
We selected IT-enabled tools that were equally easy to use and required no specific computer skills. For the mind mapper tool, we chose “MindMapper Professional Edition.” This software package allows for easy creation of mind maps by displaying a central node with branches. New nodes can be added simply by pressing the enter key and the user can add text to the branches. Appendix A shows an example. For the process guide, we selected “ThoughtpathTM,” which includes the following steps: Describe (clearly describe the problem first), Wish (make wishes about the situation after the problem has been solved, i.e., what it should ideally look like), Idea (generate ideas that can make these wishes come true), and Solution (produce complete solutions by working out the details). The program provides a separate window for each step with instructions and writing space for the user. To proceed to the next step, a simple mouse-click suffices. Appendix B shows an example. For the stimuli provider, we chose “IdeaFisher Writer ’s Edge” (see [45]). This software program contains a “dictionary of associations,” that is, a huge database of associatively linked and categorized words. Instead of allowing participants to search the whole database of approximately 65,000 words, we opted to include

26

Table 3. The Effects of IT-Enabled Cognitive Stimulation Tools on the Creative Process and Outcomes Process variables Breadth of exploration (flexibility) Number of Number of ideas (fluency) novel ideas
0.5 (4.42) –2.9 (3.47) 2.6† (1.37) –4.5 (3.19)

Explanatory variables

Outcome variables

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

Average depth of exploration (persistence)
1.4** (0.53)

Number of Number of useful ideas creative ideas
–4.2 (3.42)

Intercept

0.0 (0.01) 0.0 (0.12) –0.1 (0.07) 0.3** (0.10) 0.5 (0.96) –0.2 (0.60)

0.1† (0.03) 0.1 (0.30) 0.2 (0.19)

0.2** (0.07) 0.8 (0.75) –0.2 (0.47)

0.3** (0.07) 0.4 (0.67) 0.3 (0.44)

0.2** (0.07) 0.7 (0.74) 0.1 (0.47)

Block 1: Individual differences Divergent thinking ability (0–40) Openness to experience (1–5) Intrinsic motivation (1–5) Block 2: IT-enabled cognitive stimulation strategiesa Mind mapper Process guide Stimuli provider R2 F(6,136) ΔR2 (ΔF) 0.2 (0.16) 0.3† (0.17) 0.4* (0.17) 0.09 2.2* 0.05 (2.62)† 0.1 (0.42) 0.2 (0.43) 0.7† (0.43) 0.06 1.4 0.03 (1.22) 1.9 (1.36) 2.5† (1.38) 4.5** (1.39) 0.14 3.6** 0.07 (3.66)*

1.1 (1.07) 1.8 (1.09) 3.8** (1.09) 0.17 4.6** 0.08 (4.49)**

2.1* (0.98) 2.4* (1.00) 4.2** (1.00) 0.21 6.1** 0.10 (5.87)**

1.9† (1.05) 2.6* (1.07) 4.9** (1.08) 0.22 6.3** 0.12 (7.22)**

†

p < .10; *p < .05, **p < .01; two-tailed p-values. Dummy variables with the ”no stimulation tool” control condition serving as the baseline comparison. Notes: N = 143. Values represent unstandardized regression coefficients, with standard errors in parentheses.

a

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

27

only a subset (cf. [77]) of 10,924 words that were associated with “sandwich” and “display case,” such as display case → containers/storage → backpack or clutch purse (all words were translated into German). We selected words related to the target problem because research has shown that providing unrelated, or wildly discrepant, stimuli may be detrimental to creativity as “mental leaps” are needed to make meaningful connections (see [2, 15, 75]). The two selected words were linked to 14 main word categories that contained 116 subcategories. Participants were free to browse through this subset of the dictionary of associations and could add words to their “favorites” list (called “ideapad” in the software). Appendix C shows an example. We made an effort to select tools that were relatively similar in terms of appearance and design to minimize the influence of factors other than the basic functionality of the tools. However, it should be noted that newer versions or alternatives are available. A standard word processor was made available to the participants in the control condition.

Data Collection Procedure
The participants were informed that the study involved creative problem solving and that they would be paid €10 for about ninety minutes of work. To provide an incentive for maximum performance, they were told that the top 10 percent performers would receive an additional €20.i Participants performed the task individually in the university’s computer laboratory (with a maximum of nineteen participants per lab session in which only one of the tools was used). In the laboratory, participants first completed a booklet with individual difference measures (see the measurement section). After this, they were asked to turn on their computer screens. With the help of a video projector, the experimenter then briefly explained how to use the available software. Participants were given five minutes to familiarize themselves with the software and to ask questions. Next, cards with the problem description were handed out and the participants could start working on the task. They were instructed to be creative and were given exactly twenty-five minutes to produce as many ideas as possible.ii The document was saved on the computer ’s hard disk. At the end of the session, participants completed a postexperimental questionnaire and were then paid and dismissed.

Measures
Dependent Variables Following Amabile’s [3] consensual assessment technique, experts were invited to rate the ideas. Two veteran food-trade professionals agreed to participate. One expert was a department head of a large food trade chain (17,000 employees) belonging to a multinational company. The other expert was an area manager of a

28

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

food trade chain with stores in seventeen countries. They rated the novelty, usefulness, and overall creativity of all generated ideas on single-item scales (ranging from 1 = low to 10 = high). If no more than 1 point difference in the experts’ ratings on a ten-point scale is taken as a measure of agreement [27], agreement existed in 83 percent of the cases for novelty, 94 percent for usefulness, and 93 percent for overall creativity. The intraclass correlation coefficient measures of agreement (ICC[2,2], see [67]) were .92 for creativity, .90 for novelty, and .92 for usefulness. Hence, there was sufficient agreement to average the scores of the two experts.iii Examples of creative ideas are: “Arrangement with tourist agency: During the less frequented hours tourist buses are brought to the sandwich shop for a snack” (overall creativity: 9; novelty: 8; usefulness: 9) and “Running Sandwiches: Build a small futuristic-looking assembly line running from the kitchen through the shop instead of a display case. Fewer sandwiches need to be displayed but it still looks more interesting and special than the display case” (overall creativity: 9.5; novelty: 9.5; usefulness: 8). An example of a noncreative idea was “Clear the display case every three hours and fill it with new sandwiches” (overall creativity: 1; novelty: 1; usefulness: 2; note that the low usefulness score can be explained by the fact that this option was ruled out in the task description).

Mediator Variables: Process Measures First, we counted the number of nonduplicate ideas generated by each participant as a measure of ideational fluency (cf. [8]). To obtain measures of the depth (persistence) and breadth (flexibility) of exploration, the authors independently read and categorized all generated ideas. In total, eleven distinct categories were identified. Examples of categories are: modifying the production/supply process, offering sales/ price promotions, modifying the display case, targeting new market segments, and arrangements with third parties. The categories largely correspond to the concepts that were activated (or primed) in the problem description, such as “display,” “employees,” and “advertising.” The authors then independently assigned each idea to one of the eleven categories. The number of categories for which the participant had generated at least one idea was used as a measure of the breadth of exploration [53]. If no more than 1 point difference in the breadth count is considered as agreement, the two authors agreed in 99 percent of the cases (ICC[2,2] requiring absolute agreement was .98). Hence, we averaged the scores. The average depth of exploration was simply calculated by dividing the total number of generated ideas by the number of categories for which the participant had generated at least one idea [53]. In addition, the authors counted the highest number of ideas that the participant had generated within a single category. The count of the highest depth differed no more than 1 point between the two authors in 92 percent of the cases (ICC[2,2] requiring absolute agreement was .92). Hence, we averaged the scores.

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

29

Covariates: Individual Differences To be able to assess the net effects of the tools on the creative process and outcomes, we measured a number of individual difference variables, namely, divergent thinking ability, openness to experience, and intrinsic motivation, which are likely to influence the depth (persistence) and breadth (flexibility) of exploration of one’s knowledge base and, hence, the creativity of the outcomes. Divergent thinking can be defined as the ability to generate numerous and diverse ideas in response to an open-ended problem [36, 55, 72]. Thus, individuals with a high divergent thinking ability are likely to explore their knowledge more deeply and broadly in order to produce ideas. Openness to experience is one of the Big Five personality traits (see [17]). Individuals who are “open to experience” seek variety, novelty, and uniqueness, rather than the conventional, routine, and familiar [17]. As such, these people are expected to have developed a more extensive, broader knowledge base from which they can draw ideas. Intrinsic motivation means that one engages in a task because it is interesting, challenging, enjoyable, and satisfying [22]. Intrinsically motivated individuals are likely to explore their knowledge base more thoroughly when searching for ideas. To measure divergent thinking ability, we administered the “Identical Features” test that was taken from a German-language verbal creativity test [64]. This test consists of two tasks that require individuals to list as many things as possible that have (1) similar semantic characteristics (e.g., first compound de-, such as de-flation and de-termine), and (2) similar functional characteristics (e.g., bendable, such as rubber and hot iron). After removing invalid responses, we took the average number of ideas generated in the two tasks as a measure of divergent thinking ability. “Openness to experience” was measured with twelve items taken from the German version of the Big Five personality inventory [10]. For example, “I like to try new food that I have never tasted before.” The scores on the twelve items were averaged (α = .69). Intrinsic motivation was measured with two items: (1) did you find the task interesting” and (2) was it enjoyable to work on? (1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree) (cf. [30]). The scores on the two items were averaged (α = .71).

Analyses and Results
Table 2 gives the means, standard deviations, and correlation coefficients of the study’s main variables. In total, the 143 participants generated 1,404 ideas. Thus, on average, each participant generated 9.8 ideas, with an average depth of 1.9 ideas per category,iv and an average breadth of 5.1 idea categories (see Table 2). From a business perspective, what counts is not so much the sheer number of ideas generated, but the number of good, high-quality ideas [11, 21, 27]. Hence, we used the scale midpoint (cf. [59]) as a cutoff for counting the number of novel, useful, and overall creative ideas for each participant. On average, participants generated 5.9, 6.4, and 6.6 ideas that were judged above average in terms of novelty,v usefulness, and overall creativity, respectively (see

30

Table 4. Overview of the Main Findings Observed effects

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools Outcome variables Pathways to creativity

Process variables

User evaluations (on a 5-point scale)

Mind mapper

Novelty: n.s. Positive indirect effect on novelty via the number of ideas (fluency) Usefulness: + Creativity: +

Process guide

Persistence: n.s. Flexibility: n.s. Fluency: n.s. Persistence: + Flexibility: n.s. Fluency: +

Novelty: n.s. Positive indirect effects on novelty via the average depth of exploration Usefulness: (persistence) and the number of ideas (fluency) + Creativity: +

Stimuli provider

Persistence: + Flexibility: + Fluency: +

Novelty: + Positive indirect effects on novelty via the average depth of exploration Usefulness: (persistence), the breadth of exploration (flexibility), and the number of + ideas (fluency) Creativity: +

Perceived Usefulness: 2.7 Perceived Ease of Use: 4.2 Motivation/ Enjoyment: 3.7 Perceived Usefulness: 2.9 Perceived Ease of Use: 3.9 Motivation/ Enjoyment: 4.1 Perceived Usefulness: 2.4 Perceived Ease of Use: 4.0 Motivation/ Enjoyment: 3.6

Notes: n.s. = not significant; + bold font indicates positive effect at the 5 percent level; + positive effect at the 10 percent level.

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

31

Table 2). Consistent with the dual pathway theory, we find that the depth and breadth of exploration are positively correlated with the number of novel ideas, but also with the number of useful and overall creative ideas (see Table 2). In other words, more creative ideas tend to emerge when people leave the path of least resistance and explore the solution space more deeply (cognitive persistence) or more broadly (cognitive flexibility) (e.g. [32, 51, 59, 62]). Of the individual difference variables, only divergent thinking ability is positively correlated with the creative process and outcome measures (see Table 2). Higher divergent thinking ability is associated with a higher number of generated ideas (r = .25, p < .01) as well as a broader exploration (r = .17, p = .05). In addition, divergent thinking ability is positively correlated with the number of novel ideas (r = .26, p < .01), the number of useful ideas (r = .33, p < .01), and the number of overall creative ideas (r = .29, p < .01). Contrary to our expectations, openness to experience and intrinsic motivation are not significantly correlated with any of the process and outcome measures (see Table 2). We come back to this issue in the discussion section. We report the results of the tests of our hypotheses next.

The Effects of IT-Enabled Cognitive Stimulation Tools on Creative Problem Solving
To test our hypotheses, we performed a series of hierarchical regression analyses. We first regressed the process measures (number of generated ideas and average depth and breadth of exploration) and the outcome measures (i.e., the number of novel, useful, and overall creative ideas) on the explanatory variables. The individual difference measures—divergent thinking ability, openness to experience, and intrinsic motivation—formed the first block of variables entered into the regression equation. The second block contained three dummy variables that represent the IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools (mind mapper, process guide, and stimuli provider) using the control group as the baseline. Table 3 presents the results for the full regression model. The change in explained variance (ΔR2, see the bottom row of Table 3) indicates whether or not the ITenabled cognitive stimulation tools explained any variance in creative performance, over and above the variance explained by the individual difference variables.

Mapping the Mind We hypothesized that the IT-enabled mind mapper would positively influence the novelty of the ideas, as compared to unaided individuals (H1a). We do not find a significant effect of the use of the mind mapper tool on the number of novel ideas (B = 1.1, t = 1.0, p = .32), but the effect on the number of useful ideas is significant at the 5 percent level (B = 2.1, t = 2.1, p = .04) and on the number of creative ideas (B

32

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

= 1.9, t = 1.8, p = .08) is significant at the 10 percent level. The effect on the cognitive pathway through which the mind mapper tool was expected to establish its effect on novelty, that is, via the (average) depth of exploration (see H1b), is not significant (B = 0.2, t = 0.9, p = .35). The use of the mind mapper also had no significant impact on the breadth of exploration (B = 0.1, t = 0.3, p = .78) and the number of generated ideas (B = 1.9, t = 1.4, p = .17). Thus, contrary to claims in the literature (e.g. [14]), we do not find strong evidence for the creativity-enhancing capabilities of the IT-enabled mind mapper.

Guiding the Process We expected the IT-enabled process guide to positively influence the novelty and usefulness of the ideas, as compared to unaided individuals (H2a). Table 3 shows that the use of the process guide has no significant effect on the number of novel ideas (B = 1.8, t = 1.6, p = .11), but the effect on the number of useful ideas is significant (B = 2.4, t = 2.4, p = .02) as well as the effect on the number of creative ideas (B = 2.6, t = 2.4, p = .02). Thus, H2a is partially supported. That is, the use of the IT-enabled process guide has a positive effect on the number of useful and overall creative ideas, but not on the number of novel ideas. Concerning the underlying cognitive process, we expected a positive effect of the process guide on the depth of exploration (see H2b). However, this effect is only significant at the 10 percent level (B = 0.3, t = 1.9, p = .06), as well as the effect on the number of generated ideas (B = 2.5, t = 1.8, p = .07). The process guide had no effect on the breadth of exploration (B = 0.2, t = 0.5, p = .65).

Providing Stimuli We hypothesized that the IT-enabled stimuli provider would positively influence the novelty of the ideas, as compared to unaided individuals (H3a). Table 3 shows that the effect of the stimuli provider is significant for the number of novel ideas (B = 3.8, t = 3.4, p < .01), the number of useful ideas (B = 4.2, t = 4.2, p < .01), and the number of overall creative ideas (B = 4.9, t = 4.5, p < .01). Thus, we find support for H3a, although we did not hypothesize that the use of the stimuli provider would also have a positive effect on usefulness. As compared to unaided individuals, users of the stimuli provider, on average, produced more ideas (B = 4.5, t = 3.2, p < .01) and explored their knowledge base more deeply (B = 0.4, t = 2.6, p = .01), which is in agreement with H3b. The effect on the breadth of exploration is significant at the 10 percent level (B = 0.7, t = 1.7, p = .10).

Robustness Check: Explanatory Variables First, the IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools are able to explain significant variance in the process and outcome measures, over and above the variance

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

33

accounted for by the individual difference variables (see Table 3, last row), except for the breadth of exploration. Second, consistent with the bivariate correlations presented in Table 2, only the participants’ divergent thinking ability has a significant impact on (most of) the process and outcome measures (see Table 3). Third, including the highest depth of exploration leads to results similar to those presented in Table 3 for the average depth, but the percentage of explained variance increases from 9 percent (see Table 3) to 12 percent.

Robustness Check: Dependent Variables Using the average novelty, usefulness, and overall creativity of all generated ideas as dependent variables (cf. [51, 59]) produces three noticeable differences in comparison with Table 3: (1) the effect of “openness to experience” on average novelty is significant (B = 0.4, t = 2.7, p < .01), (2) the effects of the mind mapper (B = 0.4, t = 1.7, p = .10) and the process guide (B = 0.3, t = 1.1, p = .262) on average usefulness are not significant at the 5 percent level, and (3) the effect of the mind mapper on average creativity is not significant (B = 0.3, t = 1.3, p = .21), while the effect of the process guide is significant only at the 10 percent level (B = 0.4, t = 1.7, p = .08). All effects of the stimuli provider remain significant, meaning that the use of this tool also helped to increase the average novelty, usefulness, and overall creativity of all ideas generated by the participant. Finally, we counted the number of ideas that were judged to be both novel and useful (i.e., scored above the midpoint on both scales (see [54]) and used this measure as the dependent variable (M = 4.5, SD = 3.8). The substantive conclusions are similar to those for the number of creative ideas (based on the single-item measure, see Table 3), with the exception that the effect of the mind mapper is not significant (B = 1.4, t = 1.6, p = .12).

Mediation Analyses
To formally test whether or not the IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools exerted their effects on novelty via the depth and breadth of exploration (indirect “ab” effect: tool (a) → pathway (b) → novelty), we applied the regression-based mediation analysis for categorical independent variables, as proposed by Hayes and Preacher [37]. This method allows for the inclusion of multiple mediators (depth and breadth of exploration; number of generated ideas),vi and control variables (individual differences). Mediation is said to occur when zero falls outside the 95 percent confidence interval around the estimated indirect effect [56], which we generated using a bootstrapping procedure with 5,000 samples. This nonparametric method is superior to Baron and Kenny’s [9] and Sobel’s [70] tests for mediation, since it does not assume normality of the data [56]. The “no stimulation tool” condition was coded such that it represented the baseline comparison for assessing the indirect effects of the IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools.

34

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

The (unstandardized) indirect effect of the mind mapper tool on the number of novel ideas is not significant via the average depth (B = 0.6, 95 percent CI: –0.3 to 1.7) or breadth of exploration (B = 0.2, 95 percent CI: –0.9 to 1.2), but only via the number of generated ideas (B = 1.3, 95 percent CI: 0.1 to 2.7). Thus, although the separate effects of the mind mapper on the number of ideas as well as the number of novel ideas were found to be nonsignificant (see Table 3), the indirect effect of the mind mapper on the number of novel ideas via the total number of generated ideas is significant (note that contrary to traditional procedures [9], modern procedures [56] for testing indirect effects do not impose requirements regarding the significance of direct effects). However, H1b, which posits that the mind mapper increases novelty via a deeper exploration (i.e., cognitive persistence), is thus not supported. For the process guide, the indirect effect on the number of novel ideas is significant via the average depth of exploration (B = 1.2, 95 percent CI: 0.2 to 2.7) as well as the total number of generated ideas (B = 1.7, 95 percent CI: 0.5 to 3.6), but not via the breadth of exploration (B = 0.3, 95 percent CI: –0.8 to 1.3). Thus, we may conclude that there is a positive indirect effect of the process guide on the number of novel ideas due to a deeper exploration (i.e., cognitive persistence, see H2b) as well as a larger number of generated ideas (i.e., cognitive fluency). The indirect effect of the stimuli provider on the number of novel ideas is significant via the average depth of exploration (B = 1.6, 95 percent CI: 0.5 to 3.1), but also via the breadth of exploration (B = 1.0, 95 percent CI: 0.01 to 2.2), as well as via the total number of generated ideas (B = 3.1, 95 percent CI: 1.6 to 4.9). Including the average depth and breadth of exploration as explanatory variables in the regression analysis for the number of novel ideas (as presented in Table 3) renders the direct effect of the stimuli provider nonsignificant at the 5 percent level (B = 3.8, p < .01 (see Table 3) versus B = 1.2, p = .08 when depth and breadth are included), suggesting full mediation of the effect of the stimuli provider [80].vii Thus, we may conclude that the stimuli provider tool exerted its positive effect on the number of novel ideas due to a deeper and (to a lesser extent) a broader exploration (i.e., cognitive persistence and flexibility, see H3b), as well as a larger number of generated ideas (i.e., cognitive fluency).

General Discussion
This article aimed to provide insight into (1) the effectiveness of three types of ITenabled cognitive stimulation tools—mind mappers, process guides, and stimuli providers—for enhancing individual creative problem solving, and (2) how these tools help to stretch creative boundaries by stimulating individuals to explore their knowledge base more thoroughly. Table 4 provides an overview of the observed effects of the tools on the creative process and outcomes, as well as information on how the users evaluated the tools (we will discuss this information in more detail later). The stimuli provider and, to a lesser extent, the process guide proved capable of stimulating a deeper exploration of one’s knowledge base (persistence) and increased the number of generated ideas

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

35

(fluency), resulting in a larger number of novel and overall creative ideas. Although none of the direct effects of the different tools on the breadth of exploration were significant at the 5 percent level, the stimuli provider did increase the number of novel ideas significantly via its effect on the breadth of exploration. Given the importance of seeking novel but practical solutions to business problems, the IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools should ideally also be capable of enhancing the usefulness of the generated ideas. In fact, contrary to our expectations, all three tools were able to do so in comparison with unaided individuals. As hypothesized, the use of a process guide, which provides active support in the convergent phase of transforming ideas into meaningful solutions, led to a larger number of useful ideas. Interestingly, and not hypothesized, the most effective tool in this respect was the stimuli provider. A possible explanation is that the provided stimuli sufficiently stimulated individuals to be persistent and flexible when searching for novel ideas, while they were still close enough to the target problem to warrant the production of useful ideas. However, further research is clearly needed to investigate exactly how the provided stimuli exerted a positive effect on usefulness. Contrary to claims in the (popular) literature (e.g. [29]), the mind mapper tool did not have substantial effects on most aspects of the creative process and outcomes, that is, relative to unaided individuals. Mind mapping may prove more effective as a cognitive stimulation strategy when the creative task is more ill-defined than in our empirical study. Based on our results, mind mapping appears to be more helpful for gaining a better understanding of the problem and, hence, increases the usefulness of the ideas rather than their novelty. But again, further research is needed to investigate what is driving this effect of mind mapping.

Implications for Research
Although there is still much we do not know about creativity and how it works exactly (see [68]), partly because creative processes can operate at the subconscious level (see [28]), recent advances in cognitive science help to demystify creativity and can inform the development of creativity support systems. To the best of our knowledge, this article is the first to apply the dual pathway to creativity theory [24, 51] to the working of IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools by decomposing the sheer number of generated ideas (cognitive fluency) into the depth (cognitive persistence) and breadth (cognitive flexibility) of the individual’s exploration of his or her associative memory. The application of the dual pathway theory provides more insight into the underlying cognitive processes and how these processes are related to the novelty and overall creativity of the generated ideas [51, 59]. The results of our study confirm the effectiveness of stimuli providers for boosting the creativity of individuals. The stimuli in our study concerned a subset of the software’s original dictionary of associations, as we decided to only include words that were related to the target problem (i.e., “sandwich” and “display case”). This may partly explain why the effect of the stimuli provider on the breadth of

36

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

exploration was not as pronounced as the effect on the depth of exploration. Including seemingly unrelated words as stimuli may further open up the exploration of one’s knowledge base. Using a more remote stimulus as a starting point for idea generation is likely to produce more novel ideas than a stimulus that is more closely related to the target problem, even if both stimuli lead to the generation of an equal number of ideas (fluency, persistence) in an equal number of categories (flexibility) (see [47]). However, taking a more remote starting point for idea generation may come at the expense of the usefulness of the ideas. Hence, an interesting avenue for further research is to investigate whether or not an optimal level of relatedness of the provided stimuli exists. Finally, the participants in our study were business students, who can be viewed as prospective managers dealing with problems similar to the one presented here (e.g., devising creative marketing strategies, promotional campaigns, products, or advertisements). Nonetheless, it would be interesting to conduct a follow-up study with practitioners who arguably possess more practical domain knowledge. The possession of relevant domain knowledge, next to a person’s creative abilities and intrinsic motivation, is considered to be important for producing creative ideas [3]. The participants also had to work on the task individually in a human-to-computer environment. In practice, business problems that require creativity are often tackled in team settings. Further research could investigate the effectiveness of cognitive stimulation strategies in human-to-human and team settings.

Implications for Practice
The market is swamped with products that claim to enhance creativity, ranging from (self-help) books, workshops, and training programs to software applications, but in practice few companies systematically offer creativity support to their employees (see [13]). We investigated three IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools that can be readily used in practice, without substantial training and effort. We believe that ITenabled cognitive stimulation tools deserve more attention from managers for boosting creative performance, next to other creativity-enhancing management practices, such as providing financial incentives, giving development feedback, and tolerating failure [66]. It should be noted that we have tested one exemplar of each type of tool, but a priori we have no reason to expect that similar IT-enabled applications of these tools will lead to starkly different results (i.e., if used as intended). Given the results of our empirical study, a stimuli provider tool seems to be the best choice for management to boost creative outcomes. However, two caveats are worth mentioning here. First, management practices, such as providing financial incentives or putting in place creativity support systems, may promote or undermine creative performance through their influence on the motivation to perform the task (see [66]). Table 4 shows that participants who used the stimuli provider tool reported a significantly lower intrinsic motivation to perform the task (M = 3.6,

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

37

SD = .91) than the users of the process guide tool (M = 4.1, SD = .62) and those who did not work with a cognitive stimulation tool (M = 4.2, SD = .70) (F(3, 139) = 5.3, p < .01). Thus, although the stimuli provider boosted creative performance, it may have reduced perceived task autonomy and, consequently, lowered the (selfreported) intrinsic motivation to perform the task [23]. Second, although we were careful to select tools that were equally easy to use and required no specific computer skills, actual user experience and perceptions might still differ. Although the average user evaluations of the three tools, as shown in Table 4, were not significantly different (perceived usefulness: F (2, 111) = 2.2, p = .12; perceived ease of use: F(2, 111) = 2.3, p = .10), the effective stimuli provider tended to be perceived as less useful than the less effective process guide (M = 2.4 versus M = 2.9, p = .045), which in turn was perceived as less easy to use than the ineffective mind mapper tool ( M = 3.9 versus M = 4.2, p = .035). Thus, the user evaluations of the tools do not seem to correspond to their actual performance for enhancing individual creative problem solving (see also [1]). Hence, if management deems the employees’ intrinsic motivation to perform the task important but, at the same time, wants to raise the quantity and quality of the output, the IT-enabled process guide could be a better option than the stimuli provider. Moreover, individuals with a higher intrinsic motivation might use IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools less (or more) intensively, which could affect the effectiveness of the tool (cf. [48]). We did not find such an interaction effect in our study, but this may be due to the fact that we measured intrinsic motivation after the experiment. When it comes to perceived ease of use, the mind mapper tool is the best choice, but this tool did little, if anything, in terms of enhancing individual creative performance.

Conclusion
Organizations often seek creative ideas to cope with dynamic and turbulent business environments and continuously changing customer demands. The present article investigated the effectiveness of three types of IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tools—“mind mappers,” “process guides,” and “stimuli providers”— for enhancing individual creative problem solving. We investigated how these tools exert their effects on the creative process and its outcomes through the lens of the “dual pathway to creativity” theory [24, 51], which distinguishes the pathways of cognitive persistence (depth of exploration) and cognitive flexibility (breadth of exploration). The stimuli provider proved most effective for enhancing both the novelty and usefulness of the ideas, resulting in higher creative performance, via a deeper and broader exploration of one’s knowledge base as well as a larger number of generated ideas (i.e., cognitive fluency). The reported findings may facilitate the development of creativity support systems and their assignment to creative tasks and individuals.

38

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

NOTES
1. In a postexperimental survey, we asked participants to respond to the following statement: “I made great efforts to increase my chances to earn 30 euros” (scale ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree). There were no significant differences across conditions (F(3, 139) = 1.1, p = .36). 2. All ideas generated by the participant were saved in a document. This list of ideas provides insight into the idea generation process. More specifically, it allows for an assessment of the depth and breadth of the participant’s exploration of his or her knowledge base. 3. To check the extent to which novelty and usefulness play a role in expert judgments of the overall creativity of the generated ideas, we regressed the average creativity scores on the average novelty and average usefulness scores. Together these two variables explained 91.5 percent of the variance in the average creativity scores, with usefulness (b = 0.7, t = 23.1, p < .01) receiving slightly more weight than novelty (b = 0.4, t = 14.8, p < .01). The correlation coefficient between the average novelty scores and the average usefulness scores was .52 (p < .01). 4. The average highest depth of exploration within a single category was 3.4 (SD = 1.57). 5. In the “no IT-enabled cognitive stimulation tool” control condition, the average novelty, usefulness, and overall creativity scores of the generated ideas are all, rounded-off, at the scales’ midpoint of 5.5. Hence, we considered ideas with scores higher than 5.5 as “above average.” 6. Because the number of generated ideas is highly correlated with the depth and breadth of exploration (see Table 2), we conducted separate mediation analyses: (1) with average depth (persistence) and breadth (flexibility) both as mediators, and (2) with the total number of generated ideas (fluency) as the single mediator. 7. The indirect effects for the three tools are similar when highest depth is used in the mediation analyses or when the number of creative ideas is used as the dependent variable. We note that the positive effect of the stimuli provider on the number of creative ideas (B = 4.9, p < .01; see Table 3) is reduced but remains significant when average depth and breadth are included in the regression analysis (B = 2.3, p < .01), suggesting partial mediation of the effect of the stimuli provider [80], while the effect of the process guide on the number of creative ideas (B = 2.6, p = .02; see Table 3) is no longer significant at the 5 percent level (B = 1.1, p = .08).

REFERENCES
1. Althuizen, N.; Reichel, A.; and Wierenga, B. Help that is not recognized: Harmful neglect of decision support systems. Decision Support Systems, 54, 1 (2012), 719–728. 2. Althuizen, N., and Wierenga, B. Supporting creative problem solving with a case-based reasoning system. Journal of Management Information Systems, 31, 1 (2014), 309–340. 3. Amabile, T.M. The Social Psychology of Creativity. New York: Springer, 1983. 4. Amabile, T.M. A model of creativity and innovation in organizations. In B.M. Staw and L.L. Cummings (eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior. Greenwich: JAI Press, 1988, pp. 123–167. 5. Anderson, J.R., and Bowen, G.H. Human Associative Memory. New York: Wiley, 1980. 6. Ang, L. Creativity in print advertising: A test of the remote associate matching model. Australasian Marketing Journal, 8 (2000), 31–44. 7. Ausubel, D.P. Educational Psychology: A Cognitive View. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1968. 8. Baer, M. Putting creativity to work: The implementation of creative ideas in organizations. Academy of Management Journal, 55, 5 (2012), 1102–1119. 9. Baron, R.M., and Kenny, D.A. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 6 (1986), 1173–1182. 10. Borkenau, P., and Ostendorf, F. NEO-Fünf-Faktoren Inventar (NEO-FFI) nach Costa und McCrae: Handanweisung. Göttingen: Hofgrefe, 1993.

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

39

11. Briggs, R.O., and Reinig, B.A. Bounded ideation theory. Journal of Management Information Systems, 27, 1 (2010), 123–144. 12. Buisine, S.; Besacier, G.; Najm, M.; Aoussat, A.; and Vernier, F. Computer-supported creativity: Evaluation of a tabletop mind-map application. Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Engineering Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2007, pp. 22–31. 13. Burroughs, J.E.; Dahl, D.W.; Moreau, C.P.; Chattopadhyay, A.; and Gorn, G.J. Facilitating and rewarding creativity during new product development. Journal of Marketing, 75, 4 (2011), 53–67. 14. Buzan, T., and Buzan, B. The Mind Map Book. London: BBC Books, 1993. 15. Chan, J.; Schunn, C.; and Dow, S. Overreliance on conceptually far sources decreases creativity of ideas. Proceedings of the Thirty-Sixth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Quebec: Cognitive Science Society, 2014, pp. 313–318. 16. Collins, A.M., and Loftus, E.F. A spreading-activation theory of semantic processing. Psychological Review, 82, 6 (1975), 407–428. 17. Costa, P.T., and McCrae, R.R. Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) Manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, 1992. 18. Couger, J.D.; Higgins, L.F.; and McIntyre, S.C. (Un)structured creativity in information systems organizations. MIS Quarterly, 17, 4 (1993), 375–397. 19. Cropley, A.J. Definitions of creativity. In M.A. Runco and S.R. Pritzker (eds.), Encyclopedia of Creativity. San Diego: Academic Press, 1999, pp. 511–524. 20. Dahl, D.W., and Moreau, C.P. The influence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation. Journal of Marketing Research, 39, 1 (2002), 47–60. 21. Dean, D.L.; Hender, J.M.; Rodgers, T.L.; and Santanen, E.L. Identifying quality, novel, and creative ideas: Constructs and scales for idea evaluation. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 7, 10 (2006), 646–698. 22. Deci, E., and Ryan, R. Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination in Human Behavior. New York: Plenum, 1985. 23. Deci, E., and Ryan, R. The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-determination of behavior. Psychological Inquiry, 11 (2000), 227–268. 24. De Dreu, C.K.W.; Baas, M.; and Nijstad, B.A. Hedonic tone and activation level in the mood-creativity link: Toward a dual pathway to creativity model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 5 (2008), 739–756. 25. Dennis, A.R.; Minas, R.K.; and Bhagwatwar, A.P. Sparking creativity: Improving electronic brainstorming with individual cognitive priming. Journal of Management Information Systems, 29, 4 (2013), 195–215. 26. Dennis, A.R., and Valacich, J.S. Electronic brainstorming: Illusions and patterns of productivity. Information Systems Research, 10, 4 (1999), 375–377. 27. Diehl, M., and Stroebe, W. Productivity loss in brainstorming groups: Toward the solution of a riddle. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 3 (1987), 497–509. 28. Dijksterhuis, A., and Meurs, T. Where creativity resides: The generative power of unconscious thought. Consciousness and Cognition, 15, 1 (2006), 135–146. 29. Eaton K. Finding the right app to unblock those creative juices. New York Times, February 26, 2014. www.nytimes.com/2014/02/27/technology/personaltech/finding-the-rightapp-to-unblock-those-creative-juices.html (accessed on January 26, 2016). 30. Elam, J.J., and Mead, M. Can software influence creativity? Information Systems Research, 1 (1990), 1–22. 31. Finke, R.A. Creative realism. In S.M. Smith, T.B. Ward, and R.A. Finke (eds.), The Creative Cognition Approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995, pp. 27–52. 32. Finke, R.A.; Ward, T.; and Smith, S. Creative Cognition: Theory, Research, and Applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992. 33. Garfield, M.J. Creativity support systems. In F. Burnstein and C.W. Holsapple (eds.), Handbook on Decision Support Systems 2: Variations. Heidelberg: Springer, 2008, pp. 745–758.

40

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

34. Garfield, M.J.; Taylor, N.J.; Dennis, A.R.; and Satzinger, J.W. Research report: Modifying paradigms—Individual differences, creativity techniques, and exposure to ideas in group idea generation. Information Systems Research, 12, 3 (2001), 322–333. 35. Gick, M.L., and Holyoak, K.J. Analogical problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 3 (1980), 306–355. 36. Guilford, J.P. Creativity. American Psychologist, 5, 9 (1950), 444–454. 37. Hayes, A.F., and Preacher, K.J. Statistical mediation analysis with a multicategorical independent variable. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 67, 3 (2014), 451–470. 38. Holyoak, K., and Thagard, P. Mental Leaps: Analogy in Creative Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995. 39. IBM. Leading Through Connections: Insights from the Global Chief Executive Officer Study. Somers, NY: IBM Global Business Services, 2012. 40. Knoll, S.W., and Horton, G. Changing the perspective: Using a cognitive model to improve thinkLets for ideation. Journal of Management Information Systems, 28, 1 (2011), 85–114. 41. Lamm, H., and Trommsdorff, G. Group versus individual performance on tasks requiring ideational proficiency (brainstorming): A review. European Journal of Social Psychology, 3, 4 (1973), 361–388. 42. MacCrimmon, K., and Wagner, C. Stimulating ideas through creativity software. Management Science, 40 (1994), 1514–1532. 43. Marakas, G., and Elam, J.J. Creativity enhancement in problem solving: Through software or process? Management Science, 43 (1997), 1136–1146. 44. Marsh, R.L.; Ward, T.B.; and Landau, J.D. The inadvertent use of prior knowledge in a generative cognitive task. Memory and Cognition, 27, 1 (1999), 94–105. 45. Massetti, B. An empirical examination of the value of creativity support systems on idea generation. MIS Quarterly, 20 (1996), 83–97. 46. Mednick, S. The associative theory of creativity. Psychological Review, 69 (1962), 220–232. 47. Mehta, R.P. Exploring the Role of External Rewards in Creative Cognition. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Electronic Theses and Dissertations, 2011. https://open.library. ubc.ca/cIRcle/collections/ubctheses/24/items/1.0071694 48. Mueller-Wienbergen, F., Mueller, O., Seidel, S., and Becker, J. Leaving the beaten tracks in creative work: A design theory for systems that support convergent and divergent thinking. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 12, 11 (2011), 714–740. 49. Mumford, M.D., and Gustafson, S.B. Creative thought: Problem solving in a dynamic system. In M.A. Runco (ed.), Creativity Research Handbook. Cresskill, NY: Hampton, 2007, pp. 33–77. 50. Newell, A., and Simon, H. Human Problem Solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1972. 51. Nijstad, B.A.; De Dreu, C.K.W.; Rietzschel, E.F.; and Baas, M. The dual pathway to creativity model: Creative ideation as a function of flexibility and persistence. European Review of Social Psychology, 21, 1 (2010), 34–77. 52. Nijstad, B.A., and Stroebe, W. How the group affects the mind: A cognitive model of idea generation in groups. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10, 3 (2006), 186–213. 53. Nijstad, B.A.; Stroebe, W.; and Lodewijkx, H.F.M. Cognitive stimulation and interference in groups: Exposure effects in an idea generation task. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 6 (2002), 535–544. 54. Parnes, S.J. Effects of extended effort in creative problem solving. Journal of Educational Psychology, 52, 3 (1961), 117–122. 55. Plucker, J.A., and Renzulli, J.S. Psychometric approaches to the study of human creativity. In R.J. Sternberg (ed.), Handbook of Creativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999, pp. 35–61. 56. Preacher, K.J., and Hayes, A.F. Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 3 (2008), 879–891.

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

41

57. Raaijmakers, J.G., and Schiffrin, R.M. Search of associative memory. Psychological Review, 88, 2 (1981), 93–134. 58. Reitman, W. Cognition and Thought. New York: Wiley, 1965. 59. Rietzschel, E.F.; Nijstad, B.A.; and Stroebe, W. Relative accessibility of domain knowledge and creativity: The effects of knowledge activation on the quantity and originality of generated ideas. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 6 (2007), 933–946. 60. Riley, N.R., and Åhlberg, M. Investigating the use of ICT-based concept mapping techniques on creativity in literacy tasks. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20, 4 (2004), 244–256. 61. Rossiter, J.R. Defining the necessary components of creative, effective ads. Journal of Advertising, 37 (2008), 139–144. 62. Santanen, E.L.; Briggs, R.O.; and De Vreede, G.-J. Causal relationships in creative problem solving: Comparing facilitation interventions for ideation. Journal of Management Information Systems, 20, 4 (2004), 167–197. 63. Satzinger, J.W.; Garfield, M.J.; and Nagasundaram, M. The creative process: The effects of group memory on individual idea generation. Journal of Management Information Systems, 15, 4 (1999), 143–160. 64. Schoppe, K. Verbaler Kreativitätstest (V-K-T): Handanweisung. Göttingen: Hogrefe, 1975. 65. Seidel, S.; Mueller-Wienbergen, F.; and Becker, J. The concept of creativity in the information systems discipline: Past, present, and prospects. Communications of the AIS, 27, 1 (2010), 217–242. 66. Shalley, C.E.; Zhou, J.; and Oldham, G.R. The effects of personal and contextual characteristics on creativity: Where should we go from here? Journal of Management and Organization, 30, 6 (2004), 933–958. 67. Shrout, P.E., and Fleiss, J.L. Intraclass correlations: Uses in assessing rater reliability. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 2 (1979), 420–428. 68. Simonton, D.K. Creativity: Cognitive, developmental, personal, and social aspects. american Psychologist, 55 (2000), 151–158. 69. Smith, G.F. Idea-generation techniques: A formulary of active ingredients. Journal of Creative Behavior, 32, (1998), 107–133. 70. Sobel, M.E. Asymptotic intervals for indirect effects in structural equations models. In S. Leinhart (ed.), Sociological Methodology. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1982, pp. 290–312. 71. Sternberg, R.J., and Lubart, T.I. The concept of creativity: Prospects and paradigms. In R.J. Sternberg (ed.), Handbook of Creativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999, pp. 3–15. 72. Torrance, E.P. Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking. Bensenville, IL: Personnel Press, 1974. 73. Voss, J.F., and Post, T.A. On the solving of ill-structured problems. In M.T.H. Chi, R. Glaser, and M.J. Farr (eds.), The Nature of Expertise. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1988, pp. 261–285. 74. Ward, T.B. Structured imagination: The role of category structure in exemplar generation. Cognitive Psychology, 27, 1 (1994), 1–40. 75. Ward, T.B. Analogical distance and purpose in creative thought: Mental leaps versus mental hops. In K.J. Holyoak, D. Gentner, and B.N. Kokinov (eds.), Advances in Analogy Research. Sofia: New Bulgarian University Press, 1998, pp. 221–230. 76. Ward, T.B. Cognition, creativity, and entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing, 19, 2 (2004), 173–188. 77. Watson, D. Enhancing creative productivity with the Fisher association list. Journal of Creative Behavior, 23 (1989), 51–58. 78. Welch, L. Recombination of ideas in creative thinking. Journal of Applied Psychology, 30, 6 (1946), 638–643. 79. Woodman, R.W.; Sawyer, J.E.; and Griffin, R.W. Toward a theory of organizational creativity. Academy of Management Review, 18, 2 (1993), 293–321. 80. Zhao, X.; Lynch, J.G.; and Chen, Q. Reconsidering Baron and Kenny: Myths and truths about mediation analysis. Journal of Consumer Research, 37, 2 (2010), 197–206.

42

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

Appendix A. Example of the “Mind Mapping” Tool
This screenshot contains a part of a participant’s mind map for the problem. We translated the original German version into English. New nodes (or associations) are added with a mouse click. For this participant, the problem description activated the concept of small display cases, which he or she associated with having different types of sandwiches in smaller display cases and with changing the materials of the display cases.

EFFECTS OF IT-ENABLED COGNITIVE STIMULATION TOOLS

43

Appendix B. Example of the “Process Guide” Tool This screenshot contains a part of the process guide. We translated the original German version into English. The displayed windows show the stages of “Describe” (develop the problem description) and “Wish” (make wishes concerning the outcome). The left-hand panel enables access to the different stages of the process. The first solutions that this participant generated were to place posters in shopping streets and organize an exclusive event with celebrities.

44

ALTHUIZEN AND REICHEL

Appendix C. Example of the “Stimuli Provider” Tool
This screenshot contains a part of the stimuli provider (taken from the original English version). The subcategory that this participant browsed (in the German version) within the category “display case” was “collect/gather” (see left-hand side box). Examples of associated words in the dictionary of associations (i.e., the stimuli) for the subcategory of collecting/gathering are accrue, bury nuts, or collect a reward (see right-hand side box).

