Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 64–67

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Strategic Information Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jsis

A Commentary on: ‘‘The role of transaction cost economics in information technology outsourcing research: A meta-analysis of the choice of contract type”
Benoit A. Aubert a, Suzanne Rivard b
a b

Victoria Business School, Victoria University of Wellington, 23 Lambton Quay, Wellington 6140, New Zealand HEC Montreal, 3000 Chemin Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montréal H3T 2A7, Canada

We thank the Editor-in-Chief of The Journal of Strategic Information Systems for inviting us to comment on Schermann et al.’s (2016) article that addresses the question of the appropriateness of Transaction Cost Theory (TCT) for explaining ﬁrms’ choices about information technology (IT) outsourcing; here the choice of contract type. In brief, the article addresses the question of whether mixed results obtained by IS researchers who have used TCT to explain the choice of contract type are due to a misappropriation of the theory – more precisely the operationalization of task uncertainty – or to the unsuitability of TCT to some aspects of the IT outsourcing phenomenon. Before we offer our comments, a preamble is necessary. Although we have used TCT – and other theories from the ﬁeld of Industrial Organization, such as Agency Theory – in our research on IT outsourcing (e.g., Aubert et al., 2012), our aim is not to defend the relevance or appropriateness of TCT. Neither do we aim to discourage researchers from developing theories indigenous to the domain of IT outsourcing. On the contrary! As one of the authors of this commentary has advocated elsewhere, theory development is much needed in the IS ﬁeld (Rivard, 2014). We deem it essential, however, to warn researchers from rejecting a theory based on mistaken motives. On theory borrowing One of the hallmarks of IS research is its theoretical anchoring in its reference disciplines (King et al., 2010). Put simply, this means that IS researchers have traditionally borrowed theories from other ﬁelds to explain their phenomena of interest. As revealed by discussions in other management ﬁelds, such as Marketing (Murray et al., 1995) and Organization Studies (Whetten et al., 2009), the IS ﬁeld is not unique in this practice of theory borrowing. Theory borrowing is deemed important for emerging ﬁelds of study, as it helps them ‘‘develop credibility as a legitimate form of scholarly inquiry” (Whetten et al., 2009, p. 538) and contributes to developing and enriching the ﬁeld (Murray et al., 1995). When researchers aim at explaining a phenomenon that resembles phenomena about which strong theory exists in another ﬁeld, theory borrowing also means avoiding reinventing the wheel and allows researchers to jump-start knowledge production on the phenomenon of interest in the emerging ﬁeld. It also facilitates conversations with neighboring disciplines. IS researchers have used TCT to study IT outsourcing decisions because these are indeed make-or-buy decisions. Because TCT had been used to study make or buy decisions in many ﬁelds, it was deemed a ‘‘good candidate” to explain IT outsourcing. Alternate theories, such as Pfeffer’s (1981) political model, have also been considered as ‘‘good candidates” to explain IT decisions (Lacity and Hirschheim, 1993). Theory borrowing, however, has been a shun-upon practice when it is a mere application of ‘‘high-level reference theory in the form of mid-level abstractions involving generic and atheoretical information technology (IT) components” (Grover and Lyytinen, 2015, p. 271). In the same vein, when researchers are not faithful to assumptions of their borrowed theory, the results they obtain can be misleading (Murray et al., 1995).
E-mail addresses: benoit.aubert@vuw.ac.nz (B.A. Aubert), suzanne.rivard@hec.ca (S. Rivard) http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2016.02.001 0963-8687/Ó 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

B.A. Aubert, S. Rivard / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 64–67

65

When borrowing a theory, researchers have to be faithful to the underpinning elements of the theory. Usage of TCT in the IS ﬁeld has not always been faithful to the core elements of the theory (Karimi-Alaghehband et al., 2011), which may explain some of the conﬂicting results observed. It seems that this pattern is not unique to our ﬁeld and was observed in other disciplines using TCT (David and Han, 2004). In the papers reviewed by David and Han (2004), results obtained were also conﬂicting, and several instances of loose interpretation of the theory were observed. These observations make the evaluation of the value of a theory difﬁcult. It is hard to discard a theory if the tests of the theory are not faithful. Also, if additional papers are using previous ‘‘unfaithful” papers as a theoretical grounding, this can generate a signiﬁcant deviation from the original theory, which makes its assessment even more challenging. Misleading results can also be obtained when researchers do not take into account the nature of the theory they borrow (Karimi-Alaghehband et al., 2011). Indeed, when researchers apply TCT as a predictive theory, they ignore the normative nature of the theory. As mentioned by Williamson (1981), ‘‘the transaction cost arguments . . . are of a normative kind: what governance structure should be chosen” (Williamson, 1981, p. 560). That is, the theory posits that the organization has to align ‘‘transactions with governance structure so as to support a high-performance result’’ (Williamson, 1998, p. 40). This suggests that to be faithful to the nature of TCT, researchers should test the theory not on how well it predicts the outsourcing decisions ﬁrms will make, but on whether those ﬁrms that make outsourcing decisions in accordance with TCT prescriptions outperform the ﬁrms that do not follow these prescriptions. Unfortunately, IT outsourcing researchers have not pursued this avenue.

On theoretical contribution When borrowing theory, researchers are still required to make a theoretical contribution. Showing that a theory that worked in another ﬁeld works in a new setting (like IS), or showing that it does not work but without explaining why it could be inadequate in such situation, does not constitute a theoretical contribution (Whetten, 1989). Explaining why a theory does not work in a speciﬁc context means that we are testing the boundary conditions of the theory. By doing so, we are improving the theoretical apparatus and making a contribution. In IT outsourcing research, we might have missed opportunities to challenge implicit boundary conditions of TCT. Doing so might contribute to creating an indigenous version of TCT. Consider the role of asset speciﬁcity, which led to inconclusive or conﬂicting results (Karimi-Alaghehband et al., 2011; Lacity et al., 2010). While Karimi-Alaghehband et al.’s (2011) argument of less than faithful use of TCT has value, an alternative explanation is that asset speciﬁcity, in the context of IT outsourcing, does not have the same effect as it does in other contexts. Asset speciﬁcity can lead to a hold-up situation (Williamson, 1985). For example, when a supplier holds a speciﬁc asset required to provide the service or the product to the client, the client becomes captive. Other suppliers will not be interested in acquiring the asset if it is only usable for one client. Therefore, asset speciﬁcity lowers the competition and the vendor holding the asset has a negotiation advantage. The role of asset speciﬁcity has been observed in numerous industries and has led to convincing results in several domains. The industries in which asset speciﬁcity has been proven inﬂuential on the outsourcing decision are varied, including the aluminum (Hennart, 1988), coal (Joskow, 1987), and automobile (Monteverde and Teece, 1982) industries. Interestingly, studies outside IT outsourcing that included asset speciﬁcity as an independent variable included very few instances of service industries. One implicit assumption of TCT on assets is that the assets are contractible. They can be controlled (owned) either by the client or by the supplier. Asset speciﬁcity takes many forms. In IT outsourcing, the most likely speciﬁc asset is human, more precisely, employee knowledge. When speciﬁc knowledge is considered in an industrial setting, it is often used as a proxy to assess the speciﬁcity of the production process (David and Han, 2004). In a service industry like IT outsourcing, the speciﬁc asset is knowledge, and this knowledge is held by employees. Contrary to most material assets, employees – be they those of the client or the supplier – and their knowledge are not owned. Therefore, we may well have a situation in which neither the client nor the supplier controls the speciﬁc assets. Employees can quit, negotiate higher salaries and behave like a supplier to extract the rent associated with the speciﬁc knowledge they have. Therefore, this type of uniqueness (knowledge as the only real speciﬁc asset) challenges TCT because the asset considered in IT outsourcing has properties that are not considered in traditional applications of TCT. It does not ‘‘invalidate” TCT but highlights a boundary condition that is taken for granted in most studies: assets have to be controllable by an organization, which they are not in an IT outsourcing context. Relaxing such an important boundary condition could lead to providing a theoretical explanation that would be indigenous to IT outsourcing. It could also contribute to expanding the domain of TCT to service industries. Such a contribution is possible if researchers pursue their enquiry beyond the simple conclusion that a result about a variable like asset speciﬁcity is inconclusive. By doing so, we could provide additional reﬁnement to the theory. Another suggestion in that spirit was made by Lacity et al. (2010) about the cost of knowledge transfer associated with speciﬁc knowledge (which is also a challenge to the contractible nature of knowledge). Such a cost is ignored in most TCT studies because the cost of contracting traditional assets is usually very low. Works like Schermann et al. (2016) article in this issue are a good step to reﬁning boundary conditions. Such works enable researchers to take stock of extant research and to examine in detail the work done. One striking element in the Schermann et al. (2016) article is the wide variety of operationalizations of uncertainty. Uncertainty has been studied for a long time in IS, notably in IS development and risk management (e.g., Barki et al., 1993). Again, considering the deep understanding the IS

66

B.A. Aubert, S. Rivard / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 64–67

ﬁeld has about uncertainty, there are probably good opportunities for more profound theorization of the role of uncertainty in IT outsourcing.

On theoretical ensembles Borrowing theories to explain a phenomenon sometimes means isolating a speciﬁc theory without considering other theories in the same domain. For example, when borrowing TCT, one has to remember that it is one component of a larger theoretical set. Williamson (1985) explains that when looking at contracts and only using efﬁciency explanations, one can focus on transaction costs, and then emphasize governance or measurement. When considering incentives, property rights can be analyzed, or the incentive structure proposed to the agents. Indeed, each of the speciﬁc approaches shown on the right side of the Figure explains a particular aspect of the contractual choice.

Property rights Incentive alignment Efficiency explanation of contracts Transaction costs Measurement Agency

Governance

Adapted from Fig. 1.1, Williamson (1985), p. 24 It is important to note that the explanations provided by the various approaches under the ‘‘efﬁciency” umbrella are complementary. For example, the decision between ﬁxed-price and time and material (T&M) contracts discussed in Schermann et al. (2016) could be analyzed using Agency Theory, which would take into account the incentives for each party to exert effort (Sappington, 1991). In a ﬁxed-price contract, the supplier’s compensation is bound, which should increase effort to complete the work efﬁciently. In a T&M contract, the supplier has an incentive to inﬂate effort to maximize its compensation. This is similar to the explanation offered by Schermann et al. (2016). However, when considering uncertainty, information asymmetry will come into play. High uncertainty will provide numerous occasions for the supplier to cheat and inﬂate its claims of effort, thus increasing the price of a T&M contract. Therefore, Agency Theory would provide a richer explanation when considering uncertainty. If uncertainty is about deliverables, the explanation offered by Schermann et al. (2016) would stand. However, if uncertainty is about the activities required to execute the contract, then it might have the opposite effect since it risks increasing the cost of a T&M contract by providing opportunities for the supplier to cheat. Property rights could also be used to explain the choice of contracts. Property rights deﬁne who (client or supplier) has the right to make decisions in the future (Grossman and Hart, 1986). The right to make a decision is important in the situation of high uncertainty since many parameters in the contract would be impossible to deﬁne in the initial contract. In a ﬁxed price contract, the supplier has the residual rights to make the decisions on how the software is built. In a T&M contract, the client retains the right to change its mind and pay the supplier accordingly. Therefore, in a situation where uncertainty is mostly about the output (the deliverable) or the integration of business elements, one would expect the client to retain the residual rights (T&M contract). However, if uncertainty is related to technical elements, then the supplier should retain the residual rights since it is the most knowledgeable party to make the appropriate technical decisions. Also, these different approaches can be examined at the same time, as they often explain different layers of the decision. As mentioned before, TCT is prescriptive. It explains what should be the correct decision for the ﬁrm. However, individuals making this decision are motivated by personal beneﬁt, which is best explained by Agency Theory. Therefore, there may well be situations in which the best decision for the ﬁrm according to TCT is not taken because it is not the best one for the individual making the decision. This means that, when we use only one speciﬁc theory, we are narrowing our toolkit and focusing on one aspect of the situation. By doing so, we may well be ignoring critical elements that a broader analysis would have highlighted.

B.A. Aubert, S. Rivard / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 64–67

67

Concluding remarks The results obtained by Schermann et al. (2016) in their examination of the results of studies that used TCT to explain contract decisions in the domain of IT outsourcing support both Karimi-Alaghehband et al.’s (2011) and Lacity et al.’s (2011) claims that mixed results are due to a misappropriation of TCT and to the unsuitability of the theory to some aspects of IT outsourcing. Our commentary develops both accounts. The essence of our comments is that we should ensure that our research ﬁts the true nature of the theory and that the theory ﬁts the true nature of the phenomenon. We ﬁrst argue that before researchers can claim that a theory they borrow does not explain a phenomenon of interest, they have to make sure that they are faithful to the conceptual and contextual assumptions of the theory, to its very nature – whether it is predictive or prescriptive – that the hypotheses they derive are faithful to those of the original theory. When considering TCT, the prescriptive nature of the theory has to be acknowledged formally. Also, the choice of measures has to be carefully conducted. In addition, longitudinal approaches could provide a way to assess if, after the prescriptions are (not) followed, good (poor) performance is observed. The second point, ﬁtting with the true nature of the phenomenon, brings us to the core object of study in IS. When looking at IT outsourcing, the ‘‘transaction” is often much less clearly deﬁned than it would be when a company is buying coal, electricity or automotive components. We are trading something for which the key assets required lie mostly in the brains of the employees conducting the activities. This would suggest avenues for original theorizing. With the advantage of hindsight, we have to consider the possibility that TCT is not a perfect ﬁt for explaining IT outsourcing. We suggest that focusing on the nature of the IT outsourcing transaction itself, which involves a knowledge intensive service rather than a product (as do most studies that have found support for TCT) could result in an enriched theoretical explanation, indigenous to IT outsourcing. References
Aubert, B., Houde, J.F., Patry, M., Rivard, S., 2012. A multi-level investigation of information technology outsourcing. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 21 (3), 233–244. Barki, H., Rivard, S., Talbot, J., 1993. Toward an assessment of software development risk. Journal of Management Information Systems 10 (2), 203–225. David, R.J., Han, S.K., 2004. A systematic assessment of the empirical support for transaction cost economics. Strategic Management Journal 25 (1), 39–58. Grossman, S.J., Hart, O.D., 1986. The costs and beneﬁts of ownership: a theory of vertical and lateral integration. The Journal of Political Economy, 691–719. Grover, V., Lyytinen, K., 2015. New State of Play in Information Systems Research: The Push to the Edges. MIS Quarterly 39 (2), 271–296. Hennart, J.F., 1988. Upstream vertical integration in the aluminum and tin industries: a comparative study of the choice between market and intraﬁrm coordination. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 9 (3), 281–299. Joskow, P.L., 1987. Contract duration and relationship-speciﬁc investments: empirical evidence from coal markets. The American Economic Review 77 (1), 168–185. Karimi-Alaghehband, F., Rivard, S., Wu, S., Goyette, S., 2011. An assessment of the use of transaction cost theory in information technology outsourcing. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 20 (2), 125–138. King, J.L., Myers, M.D., Rivard, S., Saunders, C., Weber, R., 2010. What do we like about the IS ﬁeld? Communications of the AIS 26, 441–450. Lacity, M.C., Hirschheim, R., 1993. Information Systems Outsourcing – Myths, Metaphors and Realities. John Wiley and Sons, New York. Lacity, M.C., Khan, S., Yan, A., Willcocks, L.P., 2010. A review of the IT outsourcing empirical literature and future research directions. Journal of Information Technology 25 (4), 395–433. Lacity, M.C., Willcocks, L.P., Khan, S., 2011. Beyond transaction cost economics: Towards an endogenous theory of information technology outsourcing. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 20 (2), 139–157. Monteverde, K., Teece, D.J., 1982. Supplier switching costs and vertical integration in the automobile industry. The Bell Journal of Economics 13 (1), 206– 213. Murray, J.B., Evers, D.J., Janda, S., 1995. Marketing, theory borrowing, and critical reﬂection. Journal of Macromarketing (Fall), 92–106. Pfeffer, J., 1981. Power in Organizations. Pitman Publishing, Marshﬁeld, Massachusetts. Rivard, S., 2014. The ions of theory construction. MIS Quarterly 38 (2), iii–xiii. Sappington, D.E., 1991. Incentives in principal–agent relationships. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 5 (2), 45–66. Schermann, M., Dongus, K., Yetton, P., Krcmar, H., 2016. The role of transaction cost economics in information technology outsourcing research: A metaanalysis of the choice of contract type. Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (1), 32–48. Whetten, D.A., 1989. What constitutes a theoretical contribution? Academy of Management Review 14 (4), 490–495. Whetten, D.A., Felin, T., King, B.G., 2009. The practice of theory borrowing in organizational studies: current issues and future directions. Journal of Management 35 (3), 537–563. Williamson, O.E., 1981. The economics of organization: the transaction cost approach. The American Journal of Sociology 87 (3), 548–577. Williamson, O.E., 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. Simon and Schuster, New York. Williamson, O.E., 1998. Transaction cost economics: how it works; where it is headed. De Economist 146 (1), 23–58.

