Journal of Management Information Systems

ISSN: 0742-1222 (Print) 1557-928X (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/mmis20

Global Differences in Online Shopping Behavior: Understanding Factors Leading to Trust
Eric K. Clemons, Josh Wilson, Christian Matt, Thomas Hess, Fei Ren, Fujie Jin & Noi Sian Koh
To cite this article: Eric K. Clemons, Josh Wilson, Christian Matt, Thomas Hess, Fei Ren, Fujie Jin & Noi Sian Koh (2016) Global Differences in Online Shopping Behavior: Understanding Factors Leading to Trust, Journal of Management Information Systems, 33:4, 1117-1148, DOI: 10.1080/07421222.2016.1267531 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2016.1267531

View supplementary material

Published online: 10 Feb 2017.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 23

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=mmis20 Download by: [Bibliotheek TU Delft] Date: 14 February 2017, At: 09:25

Global Differences in Online Shopping Behavior: Understanding Factors Leading to Trust
ERIC K. CLEMONS, JOSH WILSON, CHRISTIAN MATT, THOMAS HESS, FEI REN, FUJIE JIN, AND NOI SIAN KOH
ERIC K. CLEMONS (clemons@wharton.upenn.edu; corresponding author) is a professor of operations and information management at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. His research for the past 30 years has involved the systematic study of the transformational effects of information on the strategy and practice of business. His education includes and an M.S. and Ph.D. in operations research from Cornell University. He serves on the Editorial Board of Journal of Management Information Systems, has chaired WISE several times, and has been a minitrack chair for HICSS for 30 years. He has published over 100 scholarly articles and regularly publishes opinions online in Huffington Post, Business Insider, and Tech Crunch. JOSH WILSON (Wilsonjs@wharton.upenn.edu) is an independent consultant who works with startup companies on strategy and data science. He was a research director for the Project on Digital Strategies and Fair Digital Competition at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. His research and teaching interests include strategic uses of information systems, information economics, online privacy, and the analysis of third-party payer markets. He has published in Journal of Management Information Systems and in popular periodicals such as the Huffington Post. CHRISTIAN MATT (matt@bwl.lmu.de) is an assistant professor at the University of Bern, Switzerland. He holds a Ph.D. in management from Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversität, Munich. He was a visiting scholar at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. His research focuses on digitization, recommender systems, and informational privacy. His work has appeared in Journal of Management Information Systems, Electronic Markets, MIS Quarterly Executive, Business and Information Systems Engineering, and in various international conference proceedings. THOMAS HESS (thess@bwl.lmu.de) is a professor of management information systems at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, where he also serves as director of the Institute for Information Systems and New Media and as coordinator of the Center for Internet Research and Media Integration. He holds a Ph.D. in management from the University of St. Gallen, Switzerland. His research focuses on the digitization of companies, in particular of the media industry. His work has appeared in Journal of Management Information Systems, Communications of the ACM, Decision Support

Journal of Management Information Systems / 2016, Vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 1117–1148. Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC ISSN 0742–1222 (print) / ISSN 1557–928X (online) DOI: 10.1080/07421222.2016.1267531

1118

CLEMONS ET AL.

Systems, Information Systems Journal, International Journal of Electronic Commerce, and others. FEI REN (fren@gsm.pku.edu.cn) is an associate professor in information systems at Guanghua School of Management, Peking University, China. She received her Ph.D. from the Paul Merage School of Business at the University of California, Irvine. Her research interests are in the areas of the business value of information technology, electronic commerce, and social media. Her work has appeared in Information Systems Research and Journal of Management Information Systems as well as in conference proceedings. FUJIE JIN (jinf@indiana.edu) is an assistant professor of operations and decision technologies at the Kelley Business School, Indiana University. She received her Ph.D. in operations, information and decisions from the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. Her research focuses on the impact of technology on firm performance, with research interests in information technology and firm productivity, social media, entrepreneurship, social networks, and business analytics. Her work has been presented at the ICIS, WISE, and INFORMS conferences. NOI SIAN KOH (Koh_Noi_Sian@nyp.edu.sg) is a lecturer at the School of Information Technology, Nanyang Polytechnic, Singapore. She received her Ph.D. in information systems from Singapore Management University. Her research focuses on business analytics, social media content, and learning analytics. Her research has appeared in Decision Support Systems and Journal of Electronic Commerce Research and Applications. ABSTRACT: Trust underlies much of the online shopping behavior. We compare trust in online shopping in four countries: (1) the United States, a mature online market; (2) Germany; (3) China, the fastest growing online market, where consumers are plagued by counterfeits, forgeries, and spoiled or defective items; and (4) Singapore. We performed laboratory experiments in all four countries. We used three experimental treatments: (1) no assurances; (2) promises of product quality and authenticity; and (3) promises backed up by third-party assurances. We examined subjects’ perceived risk associated with different treatments across different vendor types. The impact of treatments and of vendor reputation on consumers’ trust varied across countries in ways that we did not expect. In mature online markets like the United States, online shopping appears to be treated as just another form of shopping. In China, if an online vendor can establish a reputation for quality, consumers appear to treat those merchants much as Americans do their own favorite online vendors, despite problems with Chinese shopping more generally. KEY WORDS AND PHRASES: e-commerce, e-commerce in China, e-tail, global e-commerce, online consumer behavior, online trust, online trust experiments.

We conducted a study of consumers’ attitudes toward the risks of online shopping. Understanding trust remains essential to understanding the growth of and limits to online shopping, and understanding national differences is critical as companies

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1119

attempt to globalize their more localized online retailing strategies. Throughout this research we assumed that trust can be measured in terms of a consumer ’s willingness-to-pay for a given product from a given retailer under a given set of conditions. The higher the degree of confidence a consumer has in a merchant, the higher the consumer ’s willingness-to-pay for the product from that merchant. We provide details about the description of products, retailers, and conditions in the discussion of experimental design. Because the term trust is so central to our research we need to provide an explanation of how we see the word trust, how we relate it to the economic concept of reputation and reputational capital, and how we relate it to the more subjective term consumer confidence. We use the terms trust and reputation to encompass expectations about the seller ’s future behavior based on the seller ’s past behavior. Reputation as we use it is public information about the seller ’s past behavior. A seller like Amazon in the United States or Germany or Yihaodian (The Store in English, 一号店 in Chinese) in China has a long history of excellent sales and service. While this history does not prove high quality sales and service support in the future, it is correlated with it. As explained by the concept of reputational capital, a history of superior prior behavior is often a predictor of superior future behavior. This is not simply because of regression analysis or the predictive value of trend lines; this is because superior behavior allows the seller to charge higher prices, which means that the superior reputation has an annuity value. However, not all sellers have the same degree of superior reputation, and not all buyers place the same value on superior reputation. We use the term trust to express each individual’s private monetization of reputation and in our experiments we expose the subjects to sellers with different reputations and we explore how the resulting levels of trust result in different willingness-to-pay levels from different subjects when purchasing the same items from different sellers. Note that neither reputation nor trust should be considered as binary. It is not that all buyers will avoid all eBay sellers, or that all buyers will pay either full suggested price or the same deep discount. Since reputation by definition develops over time, it is a historical construct. However, since reputation is used when making an initial purchasing decision from a newly selected seller, clearly there is a mediating concept, trust, that reflects future behavior. Moreover, as the buyer develops more experience with the particular seller, the seller ’s reputation increases in our classification, from rated unknown perhaps to personal favorite, trust increases as well. We vary the items offered for sale because trust may differ across different product categories depending upon national differences in substitutes, out-of-date or expired, or counterfeit products. Confidence is a subjective term in this study, but what we are measuring in our experiments is trust and the trust penalty associated with stronger or weaker seller reputations. The study was conducted simultaneously in four countries that we thought were representative of different shopping traditions. Although there are contemporaneous studies involving surveys of differences in consumers’ trust across countries [9], we believe this to be the first study to use experiments to explore systematic differences

1120

CLEMONS ET AL.

in consumers’ trust of online shopping across four countries at the same time. The United States has the most mature and most advanced e-commerce marketplace. Germany is representative of a large portion of e-commerce in the European Union and in much of the developed world. We believed that China might be an outlier for two reasons. It is both the largest and the fastest growing online marketplace in the world, which might be indicative of teething problems of various sorts. And it was believed to have the highest incidence of product tampering, product fraud, and product counterfeiting of any major economy, which might have led to consumer concerns about the online marketplace; this is explored in more detail in the section providing the motivation for our experiments. Last, we studied Singapore because the vast majority of Singapore’s population is ethnically Chinese, and we have used Singapore in prior studies to examine whether it exhibits online behavior more similar to Chinese or more similar to Western behavior [33]. However, since consumer protection laws and the rule of law are more advanced in Singapore than in China, we felt that Singapore might exhibit behavior that would be significantly different from China, and that it might do so without actually reproducing the behavior of consumers elsewhere. All of these assumptions can be tested, and our experiments were designed to do so. Our study involved three independent variables. One independent variable was the reputation of the online seller. Reputation varied from the buyer ’s personal favorite shopping site to an unknown and unrated site. A second variable was the type of assurance that the online sellers offered the buyers. Assurances ranged from no assurances, through simple promises, to promises backed up by third-party guarantees. The third independent variable was the product type. We explored a range of product types, including food and beverage items, clothing, sporting goods, and electronics. The dependent variable was the customer ’s willingness-to-pay (WTP) for the specific product, from the specified merchants, with the specified assurances. Our study involved exposing all subjects to two of three treatments related to assurances. One group was exposed to no assurances and to promises only (the MIN-MID Group). The second group was exposed to no assurances and to promises backed by third-party guarantees (the MIN-MAX Group). The final group was exposed to promises alone and to promises backed up by third-party guarantees (the MID-MAX Group). Each subject made purchase decisions for the full range of products and for the full range of vendors, even though it was possible to specify a decision of refusing to purchase the product from specific vendors. Our believe that these treatments would influence consumer behavior is consistent with other recent studies of institutional structures’ impact on trust [18, 25], but again we are not aware of any other experimental studies of cross-border differences in the effectiveness of these structures. Exposing subjects to two treatments introduced complexity into the data analysis, but it also allowed us to control for group heterogeneity in an important way. This is described more fully in our section on Data Cleaning and Final Preparation. Our expectation was that promises alone without further assurances would have little impact on customers’ WTP in all countries. Our thinking was that if customers

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1121

trusted a website, then promises would not be necessary, and that if customers did not trust a website they would not trust its promises without additional assurances; either way, promises alone would have no effect. This turned out to be incorrect. Our expectation was that promises backed up by third-party guarantees would be most effective. This turned out to be only partly supported. Our expectation was that China would be a significant outlier in one direction exhibiting greater mistrust of sellers and their products, and Singapore would be a significant outlier in the opposite direction, exhibiting greater trust. Again, our expectations about trust in China and trust in Singapore turned out not to be entirely true. All of our expectations are described more fully in our hypotheses and in our analyses. The U.S. online market is the most mature online market in the world, and the behavior of online shoppers in the United States is remarkably similar to the behavior of shoppers in traditional physical venues. Shoppers at a range of physical stores, from Walmart and Rite Aid to Tiffany’s and Brooks Brothers, make their purchases without requesting promises that the goods they buy are authentic, and without requiring third-party guarantees. The online behavior of U.S. shoppers seems similar to their offline behavior. In contrast, promises and third-party guarantees are significant in other markets, with vendor type and nature of assurances interacting in different ways in different countries. Promises were not always without value, and third-party guarantees did not always increase the value of promises.

Literature Review Information Asymmetry and Reputational Capital
The impact of information asymmetry on the behavior of buyers and sellers and on the performance of markets has received considerable attention in the information economics and information-based strategy communities since Akerlof, Spence, and Stiglitz shared the Nobel Prize in Economics. We assume that our readers are familiar with signaling [58] and its use in marketing [32] to reduce information asymmetry and to signal high quality. Reputation is the extent to which buyers believe a selling organization is honest and concerned about its customers [13]. Reputational capital is a measure of the value of a firm’s superior reputation, which can be translated into higher prices or greater market share. Consumers are simply more comfortable dealing with a trusted seller, and firms have many ways to invest in creating and maintaining their reputational capital. In commerce, reputational capital can potentially reduce a firm’s opportunistic behavior, for the gains of short-term misbehavior are generally less than the long-term benefits of a firm’s reputation. In economic terms, the gains from opportunism cannot be justified when the damage to the firm’s reputation is considered [6]. Understanding this leads to increased consumer trust in the future good behavior of firms with strong reputations. Thus, it can readily be seen that a good reputation has annuity value [52]. Since short-term misbehavior may not

1122

CLEMONS ET AL.

produce as much value for the seller as the long-term value of its reputational annuity, firms with strong reputations tend to act honorably, and consumers therefore tend to have a high level of trust in the future good behavior of firms that enjoy strong reputations.

Information Asymmetry in E-commerce
Addressing information asymmetry may be even more critical when markets and commerce move online, given the anonymity of parties, the ease of masquerading, and the difficultly of actually inspecting products before purchase. Since the identities of customers and the store itself may not be known, receiving payment, receiving quality merchandise, and then being able to obtain a satisfactory outcome if problems occur, are all uncertain. Difficulty in identifying and authenticating vendors on the Internet makes it easy for a vendor to profit by cheating, then to exit, and then to reenter under a different name, thus continuing fraudulent activities [20, 28, 29]. Information asymmetry can reduce customers’ willingness to purchase online or reduce the price paid for merchandise sold online [2]. This can impede the growth of online markets or, in the extreme, lead to their total collapse [1]. Different factors contribute to trust in e-commerce during different stages of customers’ online shopping behavior [3]. The prior existence of a trusted physical store serves as a strong signal. A trusted third-party’s evaluation of vendors can serve as a signal and facilitate transactions [7, 43]; vendor guarantees can provide a signal and boost the trust of e-commerce consumers, even in the absence of known reputation of the sellers and their products [52]. Third-party guarantees from companies like buySAFE [7] can strengthen vendors’ assurances, but are not yet widely available in China.

The Role of Case Studies
This research started with a small number of semantically rich case studies to explore a theory of trust development in e-commerce in China. The general validity and the challenges of this method have been explored by Eisenhardt [17] and Dyer and Wilkins [14]. The application of case study methodology in management information systems has been explored by Galliers and Land [22], Gable [21], and Lee [35]. In the spirit of Van de Ven, we respect the practical knowledge of the senior executives with whom we spoke, and developed testable hypotheses from the interviews [61].

Motivation for Our Hypotheses Differences Between China and Other E-commerce Markets
The issue of global differences in trust in e-commerce continues to be of commercial and regulatory interest [19, 47]. Several papers have studied e-commerce in China

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1123

and have identified the factors that have increased trust; most find the same factors that increase trust in the United States [23, 37]. Some studies discuss the severity of trust issues in China, and ways in which factors differ in importance in creating trust in e-commerce in China compared to other markets [16, 44, 65]. The entrepreneurs with whom we spoke believed that Chinese consumers had stronger concerns about quality than consumers elsewhere, but they did not have concrete data to support this; we used their beliefs as a starting point for this research [8]. Other more recent case studies have been published on e-commerce in China and the role of computer systems [48], but we know no other studies that quantify the differences between trust exhibited among Chinese consumers considering online purchases and trust exhibited among consumers elsewhere. We chose the United States, Germany, Singapore, and China as the four markets for our study because of the varying degrees of online maturity and legal protections in these markets. At the same time, e-commerce in China may be different from e-commerce elsewhere because of the problems Chinese consumers face in their daily shopping experiences. These include concerns like unsatisfactory product quality and the persistence of counterfeit products, posing challenges to gaining customers’ trust in shopping online. A recent 2015 survey shows that 84.5 percent of mothers who shop online list product safety issues as a concern, and 66 percent list product quality issues as major concerns for online shopping [55]. Compared with customers of traditional physical stores, e-commerce customers are more informed about quality issues, because of their quick access to quality incident reports through the Internet channel. At the time we made our first visits to China for this study and designed our experiments, there was a general belief among Chinese consumers that their market was the most dangerous market in the world, in terms of food tampering, product counterfeiting, and the sale of defective and dangerous products. There was a general belief that China produced more counterfeits of Western goods than any other country, from consumer goods to automotive and aircraft parts. There was a general belief among online sellers that because of consumers’ lack of trust in sellers and lack of trust in their products, online sales would require the sellers to take extraordinary measures to gain consumers’ trust in them and in their products [8]. It is difficult to confirm whether the Chinese market was the worst among major markets, but it is clear that there was a high level of concern. Product quality scares occur everywhere, of course, but they are larger and more widespread in China than in the United States; compare the E. coli scare at domestic U.S. McDonalds with the much larger disaster at McDonalds in China caused by the deliberate sale of rotten beef [51]. The impact of these scares on Chinese consumers remains dramatic, resulting in persistent collapse of trust in retailers and restaurant chains. Indeed, it is the persistence of fear that is most striking; McDonalds rapidly recovered from its U.S. E. coli scare, but the damage to McDonalds and KFC in China from their contaminated meat scandal continued for far longer [54]. These scandals are also more frequent and more widespread in China than in the West [42]. The impact on consumer behavior is greater in China as well; the Chinese consumers’ search for safe baby

1124

CLEMONS ET AL.

formula has created a global tourist market for formula [63]. In fact, so many consumers were making trips to buy safer baby formula products in Hong Kong in response to the melamine scandal [46] that supplies in Hong Kong were being depleted and China imposed a limit on how many boxes of baby formula could be brought into the mainland from Hong Kong [5]. Hong Kong is now a Chinese city. Even though Hong Kong has a special economic status, placing import quotas between Hong Kong and the Mainland for baby formula seems to indicate unusual behavior. It is difficult to imagine the U.S. government placing a quota on the amount of product that can be taken from one U.S. city to another for personal use, simply to protect the supply in its city of origin; likewise, it is difficult to imagine limits on how much a consumer can bring from one German city to another for personal use. Because of consumers’ concerns, the executives who spoke with us at major Chinese online sellers were quite insistent that the greatest problem they faced was creating trust among consumers. Each had developed complex mechanisms to deal with consumers’ trust in their products. We describe their mechanisms in detail in a prior article [8]. In this study, we attempt to verify whether the executives’ perceptions of consumer trust in their firms translated into differences between Chinese consumer behavior and the behavior of consumers elsewhere at that time.

Case Methodology in the Development of Our Hypotheses
We conducted several rounds of interviews with three large online shopping sites in China, 360buy, Taobao, and Yihaodian, in order to assess how three very different businesses dealt with the problems of information asymmetry and the lack of trust present among Chinese online shoppers. Each of these companies has grown very rapidly. Each of them also has had to contend with consumers’ mistrust of online sellers, and fears of receiving defective, counterfeit, and even dangerous products. Importantly, each has also explicitly addressed these problems with a sequence of concrete and highly visible actions, and each was willing to discuss with us the nature of the steps they took to strengthen their firm’s online reputations, and thereby increase consumer trust in their firms and in their firms’ products. These discussions helped us understand how each company addressed the problems of building, preserving, and profiting from consumer trust. These studies suggested that the reputation of an online vendor was vitally important to the vendor ’s success. We operationalized this by suggesting that reputation would be directly reflected in consumers’ WTP for products, and that lower levels of trust could be measured because they would result in consumers being willing to pay lower prices. Our cases, and their contribution to the formulation of our hypotheses, are described in detail elsewhere [8].

Hypotheses
Our discussions with executives at 360buy, Taobao, and Yihaodian suggested the following: (1) vendors’ reputational capital may be the greatest determinant of

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1125

consumers’ WTP; (2) vendors’ promises of product quality are of little value from vendors with weak reputations because buyers may not view these promises as binding in the absence of reputational capital;1 (3) third-party guarantees would help create greater trust in the vendors and thus faster growth in online markets; (4) Chinese consumers may be less trusting and Chinese vendors may encounter greater trust penalties;2 and (5) different risk mitigation mechanisms may have different effectiveness in China, due to different consumer experience with online commerce generally, with third-party warranties and performance bonds, and with the legal system when trying to follow up on complaints. These led directly to our six hypotheses. Hypothesis 1 (Reputation Hypothesis): In every country, with purchases aggregated across all product types, as vendor quality decreases, consumer WTP will decrease. The idea that trust is directly observable through subjects’ expressed WTP is central to our experiments. This is critical to establish because if we cannot observe this in the laboratory then our experiments cannot test any of our more important hypotheses. H1 attempts to determine the extent to which reputation matters to subjects’ WTP for items from different categories of seller. Hypothesis 2 (Promise Hypothesis): In every country, with purchases aggregated across all product types, promises alone will not increase consumers’ WTP compared to these consumers’ WTP for the same products purchased from the same vendors but without promises.3 H2 suggests that promises from high-quality vendors will not be necessary and that promises from low-quality vendors will not be credible. The value of promises alone is directly observable through differences in subjects’ WTP for products online, from a range of merchant types, with and without promises. The thinking behind this hypothesis had two parts, one considering the impact of promises from high-quality vendors and the other considering the impact of promises from low-quality vendors. This is because of the extent to which differences in reputation across different merchant types will affect the role of reputational capital in consumers’ evaluation of merchants’ offerings. A consumer is likely to trust the products from a high-quality seller like Carrefour or Walmart even without a promise, because these sellers have reputations that they do not want to damage; they are likely to sell quality products whether or not they have promised to do so on each product offering. Alternatively, if the merchant is unreliable then the promise will probably be seen as unreliable as well. Hypothesis 3 (Third-Party Guarantee Hypothesis): In every country, and across all product types, consumers’ WTP for products from vendors who offer promises backed by a trusted third party will be greater than consumers’ WTP for the same products from the same quality vendors who offer promises not backed up by a trusted third party.

1126

CLEMONS ET AL.

H3 suggests that promises will be more effective when they are backed up by thirdparty guarantees. This hypothesis interacts in complex ways with H2. In particular, this suggests that promises from low-quality vendors will be credible if they are backed up by third-party guarantees, even if these promises alone are not credible (consistent with H2). Combining H2 with H3 suggests that vendors without established reputations could benefit early in their online evolution through the use of third-party guarantees. The value of third-party guarantees is directly observable through differences in subjects’ WTP for products online, from a range of merchant types, with and without third-party guarantees. Hypothesis 4 (Global Reputation Hypothesis): For each vendor quality level, the decreases in consumers’ WTP associated with vendors’ quality level will vary across countries. H4 suggests that the impact of trust and reputation on WTP will vary by country. Based on discussions with online retailers, we expected trust to be less of a problem among consumers in Singapore, with consumers in Germany and the United States exhibiting intermediate behavior. We expected online trust to be the greatest problem in China, given the incidence of problems with counterfeit and defective merchandise, and with product tampering in China. We tested this using subjects’ stated WTP for merchandise from all vendor types under the baseline condition, with no explicit promises or third-party guarantees. Hypothesis 5 (Global Promise Hypothesis): Across vendor quality levels, vendor promises alone—without third-party guarantees—will not increase consumers’ WTP in different degrees across countries.4 Hypothesis 6 (Global Guarantee Hypothesis): Across vendor quality types, vendor promises backed by a trusted third party will increase consumers’ WTP in different degrees across countries. H5 and H6 suggest that mechanisms to increase consumers’ trust and to increase consumers’ WTP will vary across countries. We expected variation across countries, based on national differences in experience with online shopping, the severity of problems with traditional physical shopping, and the effectiveness of national legal codes in creating a sense among consumers that they are offered adequate protection from various forms of online abuse.

Experimental Design
The experiment design is firmly grounded in both theory and practice. It draws on the literature on information asymmetry, and on signaling mechanisms and reputational capital as mechanisms for dealing with information asymmetry. It also draws on experimental studies of indicators that consumers use to assess the relative risk of different online sellers, including the following:

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1127

1. 2. 3. 4.

Photographs of products [28, 29, 41, 45]. Reputation of an associated physical seller [59, 60]. Personal experience with the seller [3, 13, 24]. Recommendations from friends [15, 31, 45]; the advent of automated recommendations facilities now built into many websites underscores the continuing importance of recommendations from friends and word of mouth [57]. 5. Online ratings and online testimonials [11, 12, 30, 38]; this remains important despite recently publicized problems with paid endorsements [4] and fraudulent endorsements [64]. 6. Explicit promises [10, 36, 43, 49, 50]. 7. Attractiveness of the website [28, 39, 40, 45].

We controlled for these factors by providing the same photographs to all subjects and by providing subjects with the same descriptions for Factors 2 through 6. We did not show actual URLs or websites, so the final factor (attractiveness of website) should not have affected subjects’ perceptions or decisions. Subjects were undergraduates from one of our four universities: the University of Pennsylvania, LMU (Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität) in Munich, Peking University, and Singapore Management University. All students were recruited through their university’s behavioral laboratories, and all students had prior experience with online shopping. If some students had prior experience with online shopping and others did not it would be very different for students to interpret descriptions of hypothetical online sellers such as your personal favorite website, a friend’s favorite website, or an unknown website with a strong rating. Subjects were asked to assess their WTP for 10 or 11 different products from a set of the same merchants under two treatments out of the three shown in Table 2 (later in the article). Subjects were shown only the two treatments relevant to their participation in the experiment. Subjects could choose not to express a WTP for any product they did not have an interest in purchasing, or to express a WTP of zero for products they would not buy from a specific individual low quality vendor that the subject did not trust. Those subjects who were interested in a product and who expressed a willingness to buy it online from at least some vendors, could choose which vendors they would purchase from and under which treatment. Moreover, they could express different WTP values for different vendors and different treatments. That is, we allowed subjects to select some vendors but not all vendors, based on their perception of risk from individual vendors and their own risk preferences. This is consistent with subsequent work on elimination by aspects, by Wang et al. [62], showing that Chinese consumers would first accept or reject a merchant based on perceived riskiness; they would then express a WTP only for those remaining merchants deemed acceptable to them. Subjects were shown a photograph of the product and a description of the product as would be found on a trusted vendors’ site. Subjects were then asked to provide what they would be willing to pay for the product, from the set of sellers, under two of three treatments:

1128

CLEMONS ET AL.

1. MIN: Subjects were asked the amount that they would be willing to pay for the product from each of the described vendors, with no specific assurances from the vendor concerning product quality or authenticity. 2. MID: Subjects were asked the amount that they would be willing to pay for the product from each of the described sellers, in the presence of explicit promises from the seller that the product is new and genuine, and can be returned for a full refund if the buyer is not fully satisfied. 3. MAX: Subjects were asked the amount that they would be willing to pay for the product from each of the described sellers, in the presence of explicit promises from the seller that the product is new and genuine, and can be returned for a full refund if the buyer is not satisfied. In addition, sellers were stated to be bonded. Funds for refund were guaranteed to be available, and refunds were administered by a trusted third party with access to an escrow account, instead of by the seller. Those subjects who were exposed to treatments MIN and MID were considered to have been exposed to the MIN-MID test. Likewise, subjects who were exposed to MIN and MAX were referred to as MIN-MAX and those who were exposed to MID and MAX were referred to as MID-MAX. Through Qualtrics, an online survey software company, subjects were randomly assigned to one of the tests. All of the subjects came from behavioral labs at each of the universities associated with the experiment: the Wharton Behavioral Lab, Singapore Management University Behavioural Lab, the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität MELESSA Lab, and Peking University Guanghua School of Management Lab. The subjects recruited for this experiment were students at the participating schools. In order to determine the different types of vendors that exist in the e-commerce ecosystem, we did extensive online research to determine where certain products could be purchased. We developed six vendor descriptions designed so that subjects would perceive them with differing levels of riskiness. The sellers were described as shown below. The bolded phrases, not including the word “Vendor”, were used as short identifiers of the vendors throughout the experiment. 1. Safe Vendor: A well-known online seller in the country in which the experiment was being performed, with a strong reputation, such as Amazon, or a website associated with a well-known physical seller, such as Walmart or Carrefour. The subjects were free to associate Safe Vendor with any vendor they truly trusted. 2. Favorite Vendor: A website in the country in which the experiment was being performed that is a favorite of the subject. Once again, we did not specify which vendor was the subject’s favorite, and once again the subjects were free to associate Favorite Vendor with their own favorite online seller. 3. Friend’s Favorite Vendor: A website in the country in which the experiment was being performed, that the subject had not used before, but which was strongly recommended by close personal friends.

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1129

4. Unknown Rated Vendor: A website in the country in which the experiment was being performed, that neither the subject nor friends had used before, but that had a strong online rating. Subjects all had prior e-commerce experience and were thus assumed to have a sense of how their level of trust in an unknown vendor would be affected by a strong online rating, and thus how their trust would affect their willingness to pay for purchases from such a vendor. 5. Unknown Unrated Vendor: A website in the country in which the experiment was being performed that neither the subject nor friends had used before, and that did not have an online rating. Once again, subjects all had prior e-commerce experience and were thus assumed to have a sense of how their level of trust in an unknown vendor would be affected by the absence of any online rating, and thus how their trust would affect their willingness to pay for purchases from such a vendor. The full vendor descriptions included in the experiment and a screenshot of an experiment page online, as they appeared to the subjects, have been included in Appendices A and B. The selection of products we chose to offer involved analysis to ensure that products across test sites were of similar interest to subjects in different markets. Thus, in the sporting goods category, U.S. and German students were offered an opportunity to buy a tennis racket, and in China and Singapore they were offered a table tennis paddle or running shoes. Categories included sporting equipment, highand low-end consumer electronics, cosmetics, clothing, and food and beverages. Although we did not explicitly use the differences in consumers’ perceptions of riskiness by product type, we felt that it was necessary to explore consumers’ perceptions across a wide range of product types. This enabled us to observe in some sense an average perception of consumers’ perceptions of risk in each country. Perceived riskiness differs significantly across product types across countries. Some products are more likely to be counterfeited than others: for example, a Blu-ray disc or Ralph Lauren Polo shirt is more likely to be counterfeit than a MacBook. Concerns about the likelihood of encountering counterfeit, tampered, or defective food products are greater in some countries than in others. Moreover, the implications of a defective purchase differ significantly across product types; for example, a fake tennis racquet may have no significant impact on the purchaser other than reducing the quality of his or her game, but getting counterfeit tea, counterfeit food, or counterfeit cosmetics could cause severe injury or death. Another, more subtle element of riskiness is the subject’s perceived ability to determine whether a product is counterfeit or genuine. For a well-made counterfeit branded shirt or tennis racket, a purchaser may not be able to tell the difference between the counterfeit item and a genuine one. However, for a high-end consumer electronics product, the difference may be more obvious through inspection or initial use. The last attribute we considered in choosing a product was its general attractiveness to a wide segment of the population. Since the experiments were conducted at

1130

CLEMONS ET AL.

universities, we selected products that appeal to students. Since Chinese students might eat different foods and drink different beverages than their Western counterparts, might use different sporting goods, might favor different cosmetics, and might have different price quality trade-offs when purchasing consumer electronics, we conducted preliminary tests in order to determine whether the product selection appealed to the subjects in each market. We conducted several rounds of pretests until we had tailored the product mix appropriately to appeal to the subject population in the each of our four markets. Unfortunately, this means that the products are not exactly the same in each of the countries, while the product categories were maintained for comparability purposes. The initial pretests suggested that the participants could assess up to 11 products within the allotted amount of lab time. We presented the subjects with two prices for each product, manufacturers suggested retail price (MSRP) and average online retail price (AORP). We defined MSRP as the selling price recommended by the manufacturer of the product, and this price could often be found on the manufacturer ’s own website or a trusted online seller ’s website (e.g., “List Price” on Amazon). We defined the AORP as the price at which a trusted online seller like Amazon.com or Walmart.com lists the product for sale. For certain products, like cars or televisions and other forms of consumer electronics, it is common practice to inflate MSRP, and we explicitly informed the participants that this was not the case with the MSRP in the experiment. The participants were informed that MSRP in the experiment is a proxy for the price a consumer would get at a physical full-service store, which in some cases was similar to the price from the most trusted online vendor. At the beginning of the study, subjects were made aware of the possibility of receiving a bonus payment. This bonus would be added to the standard rate of payment in a subject’s respective lab. The subjects were told that the bonus would be calculated based on their “individual performance” and the maximum possible bonus that could be paid. No further information was provided on how the bonus payment would be tabulated, and subjects were only informed of their bonus amount at the end of the experiment. Since the total time of the experiment could be long, the bonus was included as a way of providing incentives for subjects to continue to pay attention to the experiment, to the instructions, and to the individual choices that they made for WTP for individual products from individual vendors.

Data Cleaning and Final Preparation
Experiments that involve subjects entering their WTP require special attention in order to ensure that errors are not included in data set. Subjects in the experiment could potentially input 110 different WTP, which created the possibility of various types of errors. Data cleaning was conducted to eliminate the effect that these errors might have on the results. We used a principled approach for diagnosing which entries qualified as an error, and these principles were developed before any modeling of the data occurred. Data cleaning was only deemed necessary after the initial

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1131

descriptive statistics suggested inconsistencies and odd variation. We do not know what the results of the analyses would look like if the excluded data were reinstated. The principles used in the data cleaning are discussed below, and tables documenting the amount of data excluded because of each principle have been included in Appendix C. Incomplete surveys, nonnumerical entries, and missing values can occur frequently in experiments where participants enter their WTP. As a rule, any subject who did not complete the experiment was excluded from the final data set: just over 12 percent of the subjects who started the study were unable to complete it. In China, some subjects inputted nonnumerical entries that could not be read by the software. This error corrupted all the other entries within a product and as a result 0.6 percent of the Chinese data, after incomplete surveys had been removed, had to be scrubbed. Subjects were asked to fill in zeroes for the vendors from whom they did not want to make a purchase. However, many subjects decided not to input the zeroes, instead using a blank entry as their means of expressing their unwillingness to make a purchase. This occurred most often with products that subjects had no interest in purchasing from any vendor, in which case they would leave all 10 entries for the product blank. Therefore, missing values have a specific meaning in this study and a zero was inputted in its place. Of the studies that were considered complete, about 6 percent of the entries were left blank and filled in with zeroes by the experimenters’ software. Simple inspection of the data revealed the existence of inversions: a subject would enter a higher WTP for an identical vendor that offered a weaker form of assurance. If the presence of inversions is real behavior and not attributable to human error, then it represents interesting behavior worthy of study in its own right. However, this behavior is economically irrational and has the potential to seriously skew the results of our study. When we encountered an inversion, we eliminated all of the subject’s data for the product in which the inversion occurred. However, we retained the rest of the subject’s data for the products that did not contain an inversion. We believe that many subjects who inverted might have done so by accident, as there were many opportunities to incorrectly enter a WTP. This is especially true when the rest of the subjects’ data do not have another instance of an inversion. Therefore, we believe excluding all of their data would have been unnecessarily costly in terms of reducing the size of our available data set. However, for those subjects who consistently inverted, all of their data were excluded from the final data set since we assumed that this economically irrational behavior represented a failure to understand the experimental design or the instructions. As a result of inversions, 6.6 percent of the observations in the completed survey data set were scrubbed from further analysis. Our first attempts to model the data were difficult to complete or to interpret because there were such extreme differences among subpopulations of our subjects. There were actually multiple populations within each of the countries, with dramatically different risk tolerance, which in turn dramatically influenced the impact of assurances. For example, some subjects would purchase only from the safest of

1132

CLEMONS ET AL.

vendors, while other subjects would be willing to purchase from even the riskiest of vendors. The distribution of risk attributes was not uniform across all of the countries. Therefore, in order to make the samples in each of the countries comparable to each other on the basis of their risk tolerance, we retained data only from subjects who at some point in the experiment expressed a WTP for a product from the riskiest of vendors, regardless of treatment. As a result of limiting our data sources to a subpopulation with similar risk tolerance, we excluded 44 percent of the subjects from the final data set. The last step in cleaning the data was to identify and manage outliers that were extreme enough to have the potential to seriously distort out analyses. Since expressed WTP data has a lower bound of zero and many people entered zero for vendors they would not purchase from, the search for outliers primarily rested in people who expressed WTP much greater than the reference price. The experiment was designed to allow people to express WTP greater than the reference price, so therefore the only reason to exclude an observation that appeared to be an outlier would be if it were entered in error. Only four observations were deleted because they appeared to be outliers made in error; the values entered were at least 100 percent more than the value of the product.5 Table 1 contains the final number of subjects and observations that were used for the analyses, after cleaning and limiting the sample to comparable risk tolerance. Moreover, Table 1 only includes observations for products in which a WTP greater than zero was expressed for at least one merchant. That is, the final data only include data from subjects who expressed an interest in purchasing the product from at least one merchant, under at least one treatment.

Regression Models
The models used to assess the hypotheses follow from the design of the experiment and subsequent structure of the data. In order to assess all of the hypotheses, we fit two different regression models to the data. Since the first three hypotheses concern within-country variation, we modeled them using separate regressions for each country. Because the last three hypotheses address variation across countries, we fit a model that accounted for the across-country variation and allowed for direct comparison of each country’s results. Given the hierarchical structure of the data,

Table 1. The Number of Subjects and Observations in the Final Data Set United States
MIN-MID MIN-MAX MID-MAX # of subjects # of obs. 27 24 21 72 4,480

Germany
32 41 38 111 8,121

China
32 45 34 111 8,370

Singapore
25 29 37 91 5,544

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1133

with each subject providing multiple entries for WTP and each country providing multiple subjects, a hierarchical linear model is able to account for the multilevel clustering that results from this data structure [27, 53]. Additionally, for each model, the WTP data have been normalized by dividing by the reference price of the product; this made the data comparable across each of the countries. The first three hypotheses concern within-country variation due to different vendor quality and variation due to different types of trust mechanisms (i.e., a promise, or a promise plus a third-party guarantee). Therefore, we included separate categorical variables that record each level of vendor quality and each type of trust assurance, and these will be modeled as fixed effects, since they are constant across each of the samples [26, 34]. We also wanted to assess whether trust mechanisms have a different effect at each level of vendor quality, and we captured these differences with interactions. Subjects have different purchasing habits and risk tolerance that can lead to vastly different variation between subjects’ WTP. We wanted to take account of the differences between subjects, which is why we modeled the subject’s WTP as a random effect. Moreover, a subject who decides to purchase a product will enter 10 separate prices, 1 for each combination of vendor type and 2 of the 3 treatment types; so these data points were therefore clustered by subject. Repeated measures on the same subject, such as we have here, also require special attention in the model [27, 34, 53]. We modeled this particular clustering by allowing the intercepts to vary for each subject. Model 1 was separately fit to each country’s data:
Model 1 : WTPi ¼ Interceptj ½i þ βVendori þ γPromisei þ ϕPromisei Ã Vendori þ errori for i ¼ 0; 1; 2; . . . ; nj ;

where each i is a separate observation for subject j, and β, γ, ϕ are the estimated coefficients for the fixed-effect variables, and Interceptj ~ N(μj, σ 2 j) for j = 0, 1, 2, . . ., n. Promise and Vendor are vectors that contain the respective aforementioned levels of each variable; μ is the mean WTP per subject and σ is the variation in WTP per subject, and here each j is a separate subject from a country’s sample. The last three hypotheses concern cross-country differences in WTP that may be due to changes in vendor quality or changes in the trust assurance offered. Model 1 can only provide insight into the effects of vendor quality and trust assurance within a country. We cannot statistically assess the differences between each country’s estimated coefficients for the fixed effects in Model 1. In order to make these statistical assessments, data from each country had to be aggregated and then modeled in aggregate form, so that comparisons were made within a regression model and not between regression models. However, merging the data across all of the countries added complexity to the model, since we now have a three-level hierarchical model, with observations nested within subjects who are nested within countries. Referring back to the definitions discussed in creating Model 1, vendor quality (Vendor) and trust mechanisms (Promise) remain fixed variables, as they were constant across the countries and individuals. Country and subjects were both random effects because

1134

CLEMONS ET AL.

they varied across the study; in addition, subjects were nested within countries, and we have to capture this hierarchical relationship in the model. We want to know how vendor quality and trust mechanisms differ across countries, therefore we allowed the slopes of these fixed effects to vary by country, while taking account of subjects being nested within their respective country. Model 2 was fit to all of the countries’ aggregated data:
Model 2 : WTPi e N ðInterceptk ½i þ βk Vendori þ γk Promisei þ ϕk Promisei Ã Vendori ; σ 2 WTP Þ 11 1 00 1 0 σ2 0 ρσ Int σ β ωσ Int σ γ φσ Int σ ϕ μint Intk Int B B C B β C BB μ C B ρσ Int σ β σ2 τσ β σ γ υσ β σ ϕ C CC β B k C ~ BB β C B C Cfor k ¼ 1; 2; 3; 4: CN B C; B B C @ γk A B σ2 λσ γ σ ϕ C AA @@ μγ A @ ωσ Int σ γ τσ β σ γ γ ϕk μϕ φσ Int σ ϕ υσ β σ ϕ λσ γ σ ϕ σ2 ϕ

Each k represents a different county in the study, and i = 0, 1, 2, . . ., nj still represents the WTP observations nested within a subject. As in Model 1, β, γ, ϕ remain the estimated coefficients for the fixed-effect variables, but now they can vary by country; ρ; ω; φτ , λ, υ in the covariance matrix are the between-group correlation estimates.

Examination and Discussion of H1, H2, and H3
H1 (Reputation Hypothesis) states that WTP decreases as the seller ’s reputation decreases. First, we will assess this hypothesis using descriptive statistics and visualizations, and then proceed to the regression analysis. A visualization of the data can be found in Figure 1, which contains violin plots for the normalized WTP data by each vendor, for each country. The grey “violin shape” in each of the plots represents the full range of customers’ expressed WTP for all single product types, purchased from a single vendor. Data have been normalized on the reference price for each product so that different products could be combined for each merchant type. The shapes in the figure can be understood as smoothed histograms that have been rotated 90 degrees, and centered on the vertical axis to facilitate the visualization of patterns. Therefore, the maximum width (originally the height of the histogram before rotation) of the shape corresponds to the maximum frequency of customers’ willingness to offer a price within a very small range. For example, the density for the “Safe” vendor in the U.S. plot is thickest where WTP equals the reference price. This suggests that subjects in the United States most frequently pay the reference price for a product purchased from a “Safe” vendor. The presence of long tails in both directions suggests that some subjects expect to purchase at a discount to the reference price, while others are willing to offer a premium. In contrast, the shape for the “Unknown Unrated” vendor in the United States appears to be bimodal, with many subjects offering around three-fourths of the reference price, while many others drop out of the market entirely and do not purchase (which is represented as a WTP of zero).

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1135

Figure 1. Violin Plots of WTP, across Merchant Type, by Country. White Dots Represent the Mean and the Black Bars Represent the Interquartile Range

White dots in the center of each violin plot represent the mean of customers’ WTP, and the black bars show the interquartile ranges. H1 (Reputation Hypothesis) suggests that consumers are willing to pay more from vendors with higher reputations. In support of H1, the mean and interquartile range can be seen to be monotonically nondecreasing. However, for each country, the difference in WTP between the “Safe” vendor and the “Personal Favorite” vendor is much smaller than the subsequent drops in WTP from “Friend’s Favorite” to “Unknown Unrated.” Table 2 shows each country’s normalized WTP data fit to Model 1 discussed in the regression models above. H1 can be assessed by comparing the additive fixed effect estimations of the nonbaseline vendor types to the baseline vendor type “Safe,” which has been coded as the intercept. These estimations are labeled in Table 2 with a “Vendor” preceding the specific vendor type, and correspond to the β coefficient in Model 1. In confirmation of the visual inspection, the United States (coeff. = –.02, SE = .02) and Germany (coeff. = –.01, SE = .02) treat the “Personal Favorite” vendor and the “Safe” vendor as equivalents; that is, subjects do not differentiate between the two vendors and therefore do not apply a discount to the “Personal Favorite” vendor. However, this is not the case in China and Singapore, where even a product purchased from a “Personal Favorite” vendor may be discounted compared to the “Safe” vendor; the asterisks in the table denote these differences as statistically significant. Comparing the estimate for “Friend’s Favorite” and each subsequent vendor to the baseline “Safe” vendor, we see that the WTP starts to drop precipitously in each country; these differences are also statistically significant. To assess whether other pairwise comparisons of vendors result in large effect sizes and statistical differences, we reran the regression with different vendor types as the baseline. Although not seen in Table 2, the pairwise comparisons of the bottom three vendors show that the differences between them are also statistically significant for all four countries. Inspection of the differences in the estimates and the standard

Table 2. Estimates and Standard Errors from Model 1 Fit to the Data of Each Country Separately Regression results (Model 1) Dependent variable: WTP/Reference price United States Coeff.
0.97*** –0.04 –0.14*** –0.34*** –0.53*** 0.02 0.03** 0.00 –0.01 –0.04 –0.02 –0.01 –0.02 0.01 0.07** 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 Std. dev. 0.22 0.26 8,121 –457.39 966.77 1,148.83 8,370 –1,048.12 2,150.23 2,340.11 0.95*** –0.01 –0.10*** –0.20*** –0.58*** 0.07*** 0.11*** 0.00 –0.03 –0.03 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.03 0.10*** 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 Std. dev. 0.15 0.25 0.92*** –0.05*** –0.12*** –0.28*** –0.57*** 0.06*** 0.11*** –0.02 –0.02 –0.02 0.05** 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 Std. dev 0.16 0.27
1136

Germany Coeff. SE Coeff. SE Coeff.
0.83*** –0.02 –0.15*** –0.32*** –0.45*** 0.20*** 0.24*** –0.03 –0.03 –0.09*** –0.14*** –0.02 –0.02 –0.08** –0.11***

China

Singapore SE
0.04 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 Std. dev. 0.26 0.33 5,544 –1,856.94 3,765.88 3,938.01

CLEMONS ET AL.

SE

Fixed effects Intercept (Safe, No Promise) Vendor Personal Favorite Vendor Friend’s Favorite Vendor Unknown Ranked Vendor Unknown Unranked Promise Third Party Personal Favorite x Promise Friend’s Favorite x Promise Unknown Ranked x Promise Unknown Unranked x Promise Personal Favorite x Third Party Friend’s Favorite x Third Party Unknown Ranked x Third Party Unknown Unranked x Third Party Random effects ID (Intercept) Residual Observations Log likelihood Akaike information criterion Bayesian information criterion 4,840 867.94 –1,683.88 –1,520.29

Notes: *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < 0.001.

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1137

errors of the estimates in Table 2 provides a crude means of confirming these results; counting the number of standard deviations between estimates for different vendor types also suggests that the differences are significant. Table 2 supports H1. Table 2 allows us to compute the expected willingness-to-pay, in each country, for various combinations of vendor and assurance type. It is important to note that all of the independent fixed effects included in Table 2 are categorical variables that were coded using the simple contrast method. Therefore, the estimated coefficient for each variable—other than the intercept—is a mean difference from the chosen baseline, which is represented by the intercept. Since the model is linear and additive, these mean differences can be summed to find the expected values for the various combinations of vendor type and assurance type. For example, in order to find the estimated WTP of U.S. consumers shopping from a Vendor that is Unknown Ranked and offers a Promise, we start with the intercept value (0.97), add the estimated coefficient for Vendor Unknown Ranked (–0.34), the estimated coefficient for Promise (0.02), and the estimated coefficient that is the interaction between Vendor Unknown Ranked and Promise (–0.04): 0.61. This result is shown in the U.S. column of Table 4 (later in the study). It is important to note that the values in Table 3 are composed of several estimated coefficients, which means we cannot make statements as to the end values’ significance. The method used to create Table 3 is exactly the same, except there are no terms associated with the assurance type and therefore no interaction terms included. In this case, the assurance type variable is set to zero, which by extension sets all of the interaction terms to zero. The method described here is used to create Tables 3, 4, 5, 7, 8. While Table 2 shows that the differences are significant, Table 3 shows that the differences are not only statistically significant but large enough to be financially significant as well. Reputation does matter, and this is demonstrated in our experiment. Table 2 is derived by displaying the intercept (Safe Vendor, No Promise) for each country, and adjusting for the difference in WTP attributable to each vendor type. H2 (Promise Hypothesis) states that WTP is not significantly altered by simple promises from online vendors if those promises are not backed up by third-party guarantees. Referring to Table 2, H2 can be assessed by comparing the baseline “No Table 3. Data Extracted from Table 2 Showing Magnitude of the Impact of Reputation on Consumers’ WTP WTP/Reference price United States Germany China Singapore
Intercept (Safe, No Promise) Vendor Personal Favorite + No Promise Vendor Friend’s Favorite + No Promise Vendor Unknown Ranked + No Promise Vendor Unknown Unranked + No Promise 0.97 0.93 0.83 0.63 0.44 0.95 0.94 0.85 0.75 0.37 0.92 0.87 0.80 0.64 0.35 0.81 0.79 0.66 0.49 0.36

1138

CLEMONS ET AL.

Table 4. Data Extracted from Table 2 Showing Magnitude of the Impact of Promises on Consumers’ WTP WTP/Reference price United States Germany China Singapore
Intercept (Safe, Promise) Vendor Personal Favorite + Promise Vendor Friend’s Favorite + Promise Vendor Unknown Ranked + Promise Vendor Unknown Unranked + Promise 0.99 0.954 0.84 0.61 0.44 1.02 1.011 0.89 0.79 0.45 0.98 0.91 0.84 0.68 0.46 1.03 0.98 0.85 0.62 0.44

Table 5. Data Extracted from Table 2 Showing Magnitude of the Impact of Promises with Third-Party Assurances on Consumers’ WTP WTP/Reference price United States Germany China Singapore
Intercept (Safe, Third Party) Vendor Personal Favorite + Third Party Vendor Friend’s Favorite + Third Party Vendor Unknown Ranked + Third Party Vendor Unknown Unranked + Third Party 1.00 0.95 0.84 0.67 0.54 1.06 1.05 0.97 0.89 0.58 1.03 0.98 0.91 0.78 0.49 1.07 1.03 0.90 0.67 0.51

Promise” to the estimations of fixed effects for “Promise,” and by inspecting the interactions of “Promise” with the different vendor types. Interactions are at the bottom of the fixed-effects portion of the table and are denoted with an “x” between the vendor type and the assurance type. For every country, the estimation of the effect of “Promise” is positive. This means that offering a promise is associated with an increase in WTP. However, the effect of a “Promise” in the United States is not statistically different from zero. Whereas, the effect is statistically different from zero to varying degrees in each of the remaining countries, which is not consistent with H2. For ease of viewing, the relevant portion of Table 2 has been extracted and displayed in Table 4. This table was created in a manner analogous to the creation of Table 3. Statistical significance is established in Table 2. Comparing the data in Table 3 with the data in Table 4, we see that outside the United States the impact of promises is large enough to be financially significant as well. Promises do have an impact on consumers’ willingness-to-pay. The impact of a promise from the lowest-quality vendors in China is disproportionately high. This may suggest that the buyers’ expectation is that these vendors are offering low-cost counterfeits, unless vendors explicitly claim otherwise. It is counterintuitive to the authors that these promises should be believed. But this behavior is demonstrably inconsistent with H2. Last, Singapore data suggest that the impact of

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1139

Table 6. The Country-Level Estimates for the Random Effect Coefficients with Standard Deviations Regression results (Model 2) Dependent variable: WTP/Reference price United States Coeff.
Random effects Intercept (Safe, No Promise) Vendor Personal Favorite Vendor Friend’s Favorite Vendor Unknown Ranked Vendor Unknown Unranked Promise Third Party Observations Log likelihood Akaike information criterion Bayesian information criterion 0.94 –0.04 –0.13 –0.30 –0.49 0.01 0.01 26,171.00 –8,261.85 16,611.71 16,971.29

Germany

China

Singapore

SE Coeff. SE Coeff. SE Coeff. SE
0.07 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.05 0.04 0.01 0.96 –0.01 –0.12 –0.22 –0.57 0.05 0.10 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.08 0.03 0.10 0.02 0.94 –0.05 –0.14 –0.29 –0.55 0.04 0.07 0.02 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.99 –0.04 –0.16 –0.37 –0.55 0.13 0.14 0.10 0.01 0.03 0.08 0.01 0.02 0.01

Table 7. Data Extracted from Table 6 Showing Magnitude of the Impact of Promises Alone on Consumers’ WTP WTP/Reference price United States Germany China Singapore
Intercept (Safe, Promise) Vendor Personal Favorite + Promise Vendor Friend’s Favorite + Promise Vendor Unknown Ranked + Promise Vendor Unknown Unranked + Promise 0.95 0.90 0.81 0.64 0.51 1.00 0.99 0.88 0.78 0.45 0.98 0.93 0.83 0.69 0.44 1.11 1.07 0.94 0.74 0.58

promises is low for both the “Unknown Ranked” and the “Unknown Unranked” vendors than it is for high-quality vendors. Results from Singapore are also inconsistent with H2. Thus, we find very little support for H2. H3 (Third-Party Guarantee Hypothesis) states that WTP is increased by promises from online vendors when those promises are backed up by third-party guarantees. The regression results in Table 2 can be used to assess this hypothesis in much the same way as they were used to assess H2. We find that H3 is supported in every country except the United States. We find that in some countries a third-party guarantee produces more of

1140

CLEMONS ET AL.

Table 8. Data Extracted from Table 6 Showing Magnitude of the Impact of Promises with Third-Party Assurances on Consumers’ WTP WTP/Reference price United States Germany China Singapore
Intercept (Safe, Third Party) Vendor Personal Favorite + Third Party Vendor Friend’s Favorite + Third Party Vendor Unknown Ranked + Third Party Vendor Unknown Unranked + Third Party 0.95 0.91 0.84 0.69 0.55 1.05 1.00 0.91 0.83 0.52 1.01 0.94 0.86 0.74 0.52 1.13 1.08 0.97 0.79 0.65

an increase in WTP for low-quality vendors than for high-quality vendors, again consistent with H3. Statistical significance is displayed in Table 2. For ease of viewing, the relevant portion of Table 2 has been extracted and displayed in Table 5. Table 5 once again was constructed in a manner analogous to Table 3. Comparing the data in Table 3 with the data in Table 5, we see that outside the United States the impact of promises is greatly enhanced by third-party assurances. Once again, the results are not just statistically significant as we saw in Table 2, but large enough to be financially significant as well. Outside the United States, third-party assurances augment the impact of promises on consumers’ willingness-to-pay. The impact of third-party guarantees differs across the four countries. This will be explored in the discussion of H5 and H6.

Examination and Discussion of H4, H5, and H6
H4 (Global Reputation Hypothesis) suggests that the relationship between vendor reputation and consumers’ WTP varies across countries. Referring back to Figure 1, we can see by inspection that consumers’ WTP across vendor types does appear to differ from country to country. Table 6 contains the pertinent results from fitting Model 2 to the data that have been aggregated across all of the countries; it shows that the variations between vendor reputation and WTP are statistically different from country to country. However, these differences are not what we expected to see before running the experiments. The United States and China have similar WTP for most of the vendor types, except Chinese consumers discount more for the lowest-quality vendor; we had expected to see maximum differences between the United States and China. Singapore has high WTP from the three highest-quality vendors, but subjects’ WTP declines rapidly for the last two vendor types. In Germany, the most dramatic decrease in WTP occurs only for the riskiest vendor; we had expected Germany to be more similar to the United States. These results are also observable from the violin plots shown in Figure 1. We can directly test H4 by creating confidence intervals (95 percent) from the coefficients and standard deviations in Table 6, and comparing whether the confidence intervals across countries overlap [56]. For example, the upper bound of a confidence interval for the coefficient of “third party” in the United States would be

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1141

0.03, while the lower bound of a confidence interval for this coefficient in Germany would be 0.06. Since these intervals do not overlap, the difference between the United States and Germany for the “third party” is therefore significant.6 There are clear differences across countries, seen both in the regression analysis and in the violin plots. This does support H4. However, the differences are not what we expected:
●

The United States and China have similar WTP for most of the vendor types, except Chinese consumers discount more for the lowest-quality vendor. We had expected China to be an outlier because of how dangerous consumers perceived the products in its market perceived to be. Since we expected that consumers saw the U.S. market as the safest, we expected the differences between China and the United States to be the greatest that we observed in the study. ● Singapore has high WTP from the three highest-quality vendors, but WTP declines rapidly for the last two vendor types. We had expected reputation to have the least impact in Singapore. It has a strong, strict, even severe legal system. And it is a small island nation, where fraudulent vendors would have no place to hide. ● In Germany the most dramatic decrease in WTP occurs only for the riskiest vendor. We had expected Germany to most resemble the United States. H5 (Global Promise Hypothesis) suggests that the impact of promises alone will vary from country to country. H6 (Global Guarantee Hypothesis) suggests that the impact of the addition of third-party guarantees likewise will vary from country to country. We analyze these hypotheses in two different ways, using graphical tables and statistical regressions. Figure 2 presents the impact of treatments on consumers’ WTP in all four countries, with a panel for each country and a violin plot for each assurance type within country. An inspection of Figure 2 shows that consumer behavior in all four countries is indeed different under the different treatments. In the United States, the interquartile ranges do not shrink significantly as the type of assurance changes, while the corresponding ranges shrink much more in China and Germany. The interquartile range in Singapore decreases between the “No Promise” and the “Promise” treatments, but seems to remain unchanged between the “Promise” and “Third-Party” treatments. These differences suggest that the impact of the different treatments is different across the four countries we studied. Tables 7 and 8 show that indeed the impacts of promises, and of promises plus thirdparty guarantees, do differ across the four countries we studied. The derivation of these tables from Table 6 is entirely analogous to the derivation of Tables 3, 4, and 5 from Table 2.

Implications, Limitations, and Directions for Future Research
Tables 9 and 10 summarize our findings. We found support for the importance of vendor reputation in all four countries, supporting H1 (Reputation Hypothesis). We found that

1142

CLEMONS ET AL.

Figure 2. WTP, by Treatment Type, for Each Country.

assurances did not matter in the way we expected, providing only limited support for H2 and H3 (Promise Hypothesis and Third-Party Guarantee Hypothesis). We did find differences across countries in the impact of treatments on consumers’ WTP, supporting H4 (Global Reputation Hypothesis). The impact of both simple promises and promises backed up by third-party guarantees did differ by country, providing support for H5 and H6 (Global Promise Hypothesis and Global Guarantee Hypothesis), but these differences were not what we had expected, given our discussions with Chinese executives before we conducted our experiments. We do not yet know why the results were not what executives expected, but what we do know suggests four possibilities for future research. 1. The data may not reflect as yet unknown systematic differences in shopping experience that we did not capture in our surveys. We will do follow-up research to see if prior experience with e-commerce fraud is in any way correlated with subjects’ responses. We also want to see if we can operationalize ways in which differences across countries, such as legal systems or experience with online shopping, may be reflected in our data.

Table 9. Summary of Findings (Part 1): Summary of Support for Hypotheses 1 through 3 Support for hypothesis Hypothesis
H1 H2 H3 Reputation Hypothesis Promise Hypothesis Third-Party Guarantee Hypothesis

United States Germany China Singapore
Yes No No Yes No Some Yes No Some Yes No Some

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1143

Table 10. Summary of Findings (Part 2): Summary of Support for Hypotheses 4 through 6 Support for hypothesis Hypothesis
H4 Global Reputation Hypothesis

Summary comments
Supported, but the differences were not what we expected. China and the United States were most similar, not most different. Singapore and Germany were similar, with high risk aversion from the riskiest vendor types. Supported, but once again the differences were not what we expected. Assurances had very little impact in the United States. Stronger assurances did have an impact in both China and Germany. Promises mattered but third-party guarantees added very little in Singapore.

H5 and H6 Global Promise Hypothesis and Global Guarantee Hypothesis

2. The survey data may accurately reflect differences in shopping behavior that are related to the maturity of the online market. The U.S. online market appears similar to the offline market; consumers do not expect promises or third-party guarantees when shopping in physical stores, and they do not appear to value them while shopping online. Our results in China and Germany suggest that assurances do matter in some markets with less experience. Further work could assess whether behaviors in China and Germany begin to more closely resemble that in the United States. Perhaps other, less mature online markets, such as Egypt or Thailand, would be still more different from the United States. 3. Singapore may actually be unique, and Singapore shoppers might have very different attitudes toward risk. Singapore has a well-developed legal system. Shoppers might perceive that there is little opportunity for a seller to escape the legal penalties associated with making false claims about product quality and product authenticity; in that case, shoppers would receive little additional value from third-party guarantees. We can explore this with attitudinal surveys. 4. China may actually be unique, and China shoppers may have very different attitudes toward risk online when compared to offline shopping. The operators of the top Chinese shopping websites, such as Yihaodian and 360buy, assured us that they enjoyed much stronger reputations than traditional physical stores. In that case, we might expect the behavior of Chinese online shoppers at their most trusted websites to resemble that of German online shoppers, even if the behavior of Chinese shoppers more generally is not similar. We can explore this with attitudinal surveys conducted.

1144

CLEMONS ET AL.

5. What we have found is that despite the problems that continue to plague offline shopping in China, online shopping is as well-established as in the other markets we studied, in the sense that the best online vendors are seen in China much as the best online vendors are seen in other markets. This suggests that it is possible to launch online businesses in China, even in risky categories like food and beverages, if a reputation for quality can be established early. This was demonstrated by Yihaodian. We found that reputation matters. The effects of promises and third-party assurance were more complex than we initially thought because they interacted in complex ways with vendor type and with country; differences at the country level probably reflect differences in experience and legal system in ways that we did not attempt to capture in this study. Differences among the countries were indeed significant. Some of our suggestions for future research can address the limitations above and also extend our knowledge of cross-national differences in e-commerce trust mechanisms and signaling: 1. The lack of support for H3 (Third-Party Guarantee Hypothesis) in the United States is particularly surprising. We know from A-B testing conducted by buySAFE that third-party assurances do have significant value in the United States, as measured by actual purchase price [7]. However, we also know that this was true only for the most risk-averse shoppers, and these have been excluded from our study. Similarly, we know from our interviews with Taobao that credible third-party assurances have significant value in China, probably more than was reflected in our experiment [8]. It is possible that users did not view assurances from Taobao as third-party guarantees, and thus consumers did not generalize trust in guarantees from Taobao to guarantees from other third parties. We are in the process of designing studies that would allow us to explore both of these potential confounds. 2. Running the studies again after a significant passage of time would enable us to assess whether differences between the United States and other countries captured something fundamental due to differences in risk assessments or confidence in local legal systems, or simply reflected differences in the amount of experience each market had with online shopping at a single instant in time. 3. Chinese citizens have far more experience with counterfeit products than their Western counterparts. Sometimes a counterfeit product is acceptable, especially with items of clothing where the products are not actually harmful or dangerous and where they may send the same cues to the purchaser ’s friends as a genuine product. As a result, Chinese consumers will often purchase counterfeit products intentionally, as large numbers of them do when shopping in special markets for counterfeit products like the Silk Street Market in Beijing. While these products are counterfeit, both buyer and seller are fully informed. Perhaps Chinese consumers online use low price and the absence of assurances as signals that they are purchasing

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1145

counterfeit goods, and perhaps they use higher prices and the presence of assurances as signals that they are purchasing authentic and genuine products. While this would appear to be too easy a signal to fake, encouraging masquerading, it is possible that social norms make this a reliable signal among Chinese consumers, or at least among the Chinese students who participated in our study. 4. It would be useful to conduct more in-depth examination of demographic and attitudinal data to derive explanations for the differences across markets, if these differences are indeed stable and not solely a function of the different levels of experience with online shopping among consumers in each market. Are differences in experience with online shopping and with the occurrence of counterfeit or defective products online salient? Are differences in experience with traditional shopping with the occurrence of counterfeit or defective products in traditional physical shopping venues significant? Are differences in legal codes and the perception of the protections they offer significant?

Supplemental File
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher ’s website at http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2016.1267531

NOTES
1. We will refer to vendors as high- or low-quality, rather than vendors with strong reputation or vendors with weak reputations for terseness in much of what follows. 2. We define the trust penalty to be the penalty that a low-reputation vendor experiences when consumers exhibit lower willingness-to-pay from retailers that enjoy lower degrees of trust from those consumers. 3. The treatment “promises alone” refers to promises offered without third-party guarantees. 4. Note that it is possible for H2 to be unsupported because promises alone do have an impact, and for H5 to be supported or not, depending on differences in the impacts of promises alone across countries. 5. Both the initial data set and the cleaned data set have been retained and are available from the first author. 6. Although the presence of nonoverlapping confidence is sufficient to imply statistically significant differences, it is not necessary. The presence of overlapping confidence intervals is not sufficient to imply the absence of statistically significant differences.

REFERENCES
1. Akerlof, G.A. The market for “lemons”: Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, 3 (1970), 488–500. 2. Ba, S., and Pavlou, P.A. Evidence of the effect of trust building technology in electronic markets: Price premiums and buyer behavior. MIS Quarterly, 26, 3 (2002), 243–268. 3. Bhattacherjee, A. Individual trust in online firms: Scale development and initial test. Journal of Management Information Systems, 19, 1 (2002), 211–242.

1146

CLEMONS ET AL.

4. Bienkov, A. Astroturfing: What is it and why does it matter? Guardian, February 8, 2012. Available at: www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/08/what-is-astroturfing (accessed on August 26, 2016). 5. Chan, S. No plan to lift two-can milk formula limit at the border, says Hong Kong health minister. South China Morning Post, September 8, 2015. Available at: www.scmp.com/ news/hong-kong/health-environment/article/1856056/hong-kong-health-minister-says-noplan-ease-ban (accessed on February 21, 2016). 6. Chiles, T.H., and McMackin, J.F. Integrating variable risk preferences, trust, and transaction cost economics. Academy of Management Review, 21, 1 (1996), 73–99. 7. Clemons, E.K. An empirical investigation of third-party seller rating systems in e-commerce: The case of buySAFE. Journal of Management Information Systems, 24, 2 (2007), 43–71. 8. Clemons, E.K.; Jin, F.; Ren, F.; Wang, Y.; and Wilson, J. The special challenges of e-commerce in China: A preliminary investigation of sufficient conditions for generating adequate consumer trust for initial launch. Proceedings of the 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Wailea, Maui, HI, 2012, pp. 4562–4571. 9. Connolly, R. E-commerce trust beliefs: Examining the role of national culture. In P. Isaias and M.B. Nunes (eds.), Information Systems Research and Exploring Social Artifacts: Approaches and Methodologies. Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2012, pp. 20–42. 10. Davis, S.; Gerstner, E.; and Hagery, M. Money back guarantees in retailing: matching products to consumer tastes. Journal of Retailing, 71, 1 (1995), 7–22. 11. Dellarocas, C., and Wood, C.A. The sound of silence in online feedback: Estimating trading risks in the presence of reporting bias. Management Science, 54, 3 (2008), 460–476. 12. Dholakia, U.M. The usefulness of bidders’ reputation ratings to sellers in online auctions. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 19, 1 (2005), 31–40. 13. Doney, P.M., and Cannon, J.P. An examination of the nature of trust in buyer–seller relationships. Journal of Marketing, 61, 2 (1997), 35–51. 14. Dyer, W.G., and Wilkins, A.L. Better stories, not better constructs, to generate better theory: A rejoinder to Eisenhardt. Academy of Management Review, 16, 3 (1991), 613–619. 15. Edelman, B. Adverse selection in online “trust” certifications and search results. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 10, 1 (2011), 17–25. 16. Efendioglu, A.M., and Yip, V.F. Chinese culture and e-commerce: An exploratory study. Interacting with Computers, 16, 1 (2004), 45–62. 17. Eisenhardt, K.M. Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management Review, 14, 4 (1989), 532–550. 18. Fang, Y.; Qureshi, I.; Sun, H.; McCole, P.; Ramsey, E.; and Lim, K. H. Trust, satisfaction, and online repurchase intention: The moderating role of perceived effectiveness of e-commerce institutional mechanisms. MIS Quarterly, 38, 2 (2014), 407–427. 19. Foley, J. Building trust and other next steps in global e-commerce. Forbes, August 15, 2013. Available at: www.forbes.com/sites/oracle/2013/08/15/building-trust-and-other-nextsteps-in-global-e-commerce/#69d7e9926e73 (accessed on August 26, 2016). 20. Friedman, E.J., and Resnick, P. The social cost of cheap pseudonyms. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 10, 2 (2001), 173–199. 21. Gable, G.G. Integrating case study and survey research methods: An example in information systems. European Journal of Information Systems, 3, 2 (1994), 112–126. 22. Galliers, R.D., and Land, F.F. Viewpoint: Choosing appropriate information systems research methodologies. Communications of the ACM, 30, 11 (1987), 901–902. 23. Gao, Y., and Wu, X. A cognitive model of trust in e-commerce: Evidence from a field study in China. Journal of Applied Business Research, 26, 1 (2010), 37–44. 24. Gefen, D.; Karahanna, E.; and Straub, D.W. Trust and TAM in online shopping: An integrated model. MIS Quarterly, 27, 1 (2003), 51–90. 25. Gefen, D., and Pavlou, P.A. The boundaries of trust and risk: The quadratic moderating role of institutional structures. Information Systems Research, 23, 3 (2012), 940–959. 26. Gelman, A. Discussion paper: Analysis of variance—why it is more important than ever. Annals of Statistics, 33, 1 (2005), 1–53. 27. Gelman, A., and Hill, J. Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel Models. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007.

GLOBAL DIFFERENCES IN ONLINE SHOPPING BEHAVIOR

1147

28. Jarvenpaa, S.L.; Tractinsky, N.; and Vitalec, M. Consumer trust in an Internet store. Information Technology and Management, 1 (2000), 45–71. 29. Jin, G.Z., and Kato, A. Price, quality, and reputation: Evidence from an online field experiment. RAND Journal of Economics, 37, 4 (2006), 983–1005. 30. Khopkar, T.; Li, X.; and Resnick, P. Self-selection, slipping, salvaging, slacking, and stoning: The impacts of negative feedback at eBay. Proceedings of ACM EC05 Conference on Electronic Commerce. Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2005, 223–231. 31. Kim, D., and Benbasat, I. The effects of trust-assuring arguments on consumer trust in Internet stores: Application of Toulmin’s model of argumentation. Information Systems Research, 17, 3 (2006), 286–300. 32. Kirmani, A., and Rao, A.R. No pain, no gain: A critical review of the literature on signaling unobservable product quality. Journal of Marketing, 64, 2 (2000), 66–79. 33. Koh, N.S; Hu, N.; and Clemons, E.K. Do online reviews reflect a product’s true perceived quality? An investigation of online movie reviews across cultures. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 9, 5 (2010), 374–385. 34. Kreft, I., and de Leeuw, J. Introducing Multilevel Modeling. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998. 35. Lee, A.S. A scientific methodology for MIS case studies. MIS Quarterly, 13,1 (1989), 33–50. 36. Lee, B.C.; Ang, L.; and Dubelaar, C. Lemons on the web: A signaling approach to the problem of trust in Internet commerce. Journal of Economic Psychology, 26, 5 (October 2005), 607–623. 37. Liao, Z., and Shi, X. Consumer perceptions of Internet-based e-retailing: An empirical research in Hong Kong. Journal of Services Marketing, 23, 1 (2009), 24–30. 38. Lim, K.H.; Sia, C.L.; Lee, M.K.O.; and Benbasat, I. Do I trust you online, and if so, will I buy? An empirical study of two trust-building strategies. Journal of Management Information Systems, 23, 2 (2006), 233–266. 39. Liu, B. Q., and Goodhue, D. L. Two worlds of trust for potential e-commerce users: Humans as cognitive misers. Information Systems Research, 23, 4 (2012), 1246–1262. 40. Lohse, G.L., and Spiller, P. Electronic shopping. Communications of the ACM, 41, 7 (1998), 81–87. 41. Lowry, P.B.; Vance, A.; Moody, G.; Beckman, B.; and Read, A. Explaining and predicting the impact of branding alliances and web site quality on initial consumer trust of e-commerce web sites. Journal of Management Information Systems, 24, 4 (2008), 199–224. 42. Luo, I. 5 Chinese meat scandals that will make you cringe. Epoch Times, July 24, 2015. Available at: www.theepochtimes.com/n3/1473141-5-chinese-meat-scandals-that-will-makeyou-cringe/ (accessed on February 21, 2016). 43. Lutz, N.A. Warranties as signals under consumer moral hazard. RAND Journal of Economics, 20, 2 (1989), 239–255. 44. Martinsons, M.G. Relationship-based e-commerce: Theory and evidence from China. Information Systems Journal, 18, 4 (2008), 331–356. 45. Mavlanova, T., and Benbunan-Fich, R. Counterfeit products on the Internet: The role of seller-level and product-level information. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 15, 2 (2010), 79–104. 46. Mooney, P. The story behind China’s tainted milk scandal. US News, October 9, 2008. Available at: www.usnews.com/news/world/articles/2008/10/09/the-story-behind-chinastainted-milk-scandal (accessed on February 21, 2016). 47. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Consumer protection in e-commerce: OECD recommendation. Paris, OECD, 2016. Available at: http://dx.doi. org/10.1787/9789264255258-en (accessed on August 26, 2016). 48. Ou, C.; Pavlou, P.A.; and Davison, R. Swift Guanxi in online marketplaces: The role of computer-mediated-communication technologies. MIS Quarterly, 38, 1 (2014), 209–230. 49. Padmanabhan, V., and Rao, R. Warranty policy and extended service contracts: Theory and an application to automobiles. Marketing Science, 12, 3 (1993), 230–247. 50. Pennington, R.; Wilcox, H.D.; and Grover, V. The role of system trust in business-toconsumer transactions. Journal of Management Information Systems, 20, 3 (2003), 197–226.

1148

CLEMONS ET AL.

51. Plucinska, J. China seizes rotting 40-year-old meat destined for dinner tables. Time, June 24, 2015. Available at: http://time.com/3933411/china-meat-40-years-food-safetysmuggled/(accessed on February 21, 2016). 52. Rao, A.R., and Monroe, K.B. Causes and consequences of price premiums. Journal of Business, 69, 4 (1996), 511–535. 53. Raudenbush, S. W., and Bryk, A. S. Hierarchical Linear Models. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2002. 54. Riley, C. Yum’s China fiasco shows danger of food scandals. CNN.com. February 4, 2015. Available at: http://money.cnn.com/2015/02/04/investing/china-yum-brands-kfc/ (accessed on February 21, 2016). 55. “Safety is the top concern of chinese online mother shoppers.” China Internet Watch, November 20, 2015. Available at: www.chinainternetwatch.com/15101/safety-crucial-babies/ (accessed on July 27, 2016). 56. Schenker, N., and Gentleman, J. On judging the significance of differences by examining the overlap between confidence intervals. American Statistician, 55, 3 (2001), 182–186. 57. Shi, N.; Y. Hong; Wang, K.; and Pavlou, P.A. Social commerce beyond word of mouth: Role of social distance and social norms in online referral incentive systems. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS). Milan, Italy, 2013. 58. Spence, M. Job market signaling. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87, 3 (1973), 355–374. 59. Stewart, K.J. Trust transfer on the World Wide Web. Organization Science, 14, 1 (2003), 5–17. 60. Tang, F.F., and Xing, X. Will the growth of multi-channel retailing diminish the pricing efficiency of the web? Journal of Retailing, 77, 3 (2001), 319–333. 61. Van de Ven, A. Engaged Scholarship: A Guide for Organizational and Social Research. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007. 62. Wang, M.; Gu, B.; and Ye, Q. Elimination by aspects in electronic commerce: Evidence from online marketplace and implications for empirical model specification. Proceedings of the 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Waikoloa, HI, 2014, pp. 4142– 4147. 63. Wong, E. Chinese search for infant formula goes global. New York Times, July 25, 2013. Available at: www.nytimes.com/2013/07/26/world/asia/chinas-search-for-infant-formula-goesglobal.html?_r=0 (accessed on February 21, 2016). 64. Ye, S.; Gao, G.; and Viswanathan, S. Strategic behavior in online reputation systems: Evidence from revoking on eBay. MIS Quarterly, 38, 4 (2014), 1033–1056. 65. Yoon, C. The effects of national culture values on consumer acceptance of e-commerce: Online shoppers in China. Information and Management, 46, 5 (2009), 294–301.

