doi: 10.1111/isj.12105 Info Systems J (2016) 26, 191–194 191

Editorial The art of storytelling
Stories are fundamental to cultures and societies. We have told stories for thousands of years. Stories can change the world. Storytelling is thus a critical skill that authors need to develop, if they wish to attract and hold the attention of their audience. Each of us should be able to identify one or more stories that we found so well told that it gripped us from page to page. However, the stories that we tell in academia are not always as rich and compelling as they could be. Furthermore, while authors are the principal storytellers, reviewers and editors also have a role to play, because they may guide the story, suggest nuances of direction and, sadly, also diminish the story by suggesting that important details be excluded. It is important here to distinguish between the research story and the researcher’s story. Both are important. Not so long ago, a reviewer of one of my papers told me not to describe all the false starts, culs-de-sac and other ‘dirty washing’, but instead to jump to the main ﬁndings and conclusion. This kind of truncated teleological reasoning may be good for readers with little patience or interest in storylines, but it is neither effective science nor good storytelling. Badly told stories are likely to have less impact and to attract less attention. A well-told story will include both the research perspective and the researcher’s perspective. My purpose in this editorial is to highlight the importance of storytelling in our research and to encourage all authors to write their papers in such a way that they tell compelling stories. In practice, we ﬁnd many examples of how stories are used to persuade or convince people to act in speciﬁc ways. Stories can thus function as tools for both learning and action (Clausen, 1994; Serafeimidis & Smithson, 2003). Independently, I hope to encourage our reviewers and editors to work with authors to develop their stories. To illustrate my point, I would like to refer you to a paper recently published in the Information Systems Journal, viz.: Bødker et al. (2014). I will not spoil the story for you, but essentially, the authors present their research in such a way that they not only explore how their data subjects experience everyday computing devices (smart phones) but also tell a rich and entertaining story at the same time. Notwithstanding my enthusiasm for storytelling, I do realise that it is not quite so simple as just asking people to do more of it. There are skills to learn and I ﬁrmly believe that good storytelling is more of an art than a science. Writing for a speciﬁc audience is clearly part of the process: just as romances and detective stories have different audiences, so do different genres of writing in information systems (IS); indeed, each journal has its own house style. Normally, I would expect stories to be qualitative, and so it may be easier to tell stories when the research data itself is qualitative, for instance, in a case study, ethnography, hermeneutic investigation or action research. But a good storyteller ought to be able to write a story about almost any kind of research because the underlying research motivation and the way it is justiﬁed and later transformed into a research design are fundamentally a creative process. This
© 2016 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

192

Editorial

should be as true for a case study as for design science, surveys or experiments. In an earlier Information Systems Journal editorial, Trauth (2015) has already explained how Literature Reviews can be structured as stories. I argue that many other parts of a research paper, notably the introduction, motivation, discussion and conclusion, can also be structured around a storyline. My more practical suggestion for storytelling is to tell a complete story: do not unnecessarily truncate it or exclude important details. Although you know all the details, your readers do not, so you need to ensure that sufﬁcient detail is available for them to follow your arguments. There are too many genres in storytelling to be speciﬁc here about which style you could adopt. You may prefer a linear telling of events that clearly progresses from a to b to c in a logical manner. Alternatively, you may keep a sudden denouement, perhaps an unexpected ﬁnding or serendipitous revelation, for late in the discussion. Case studies or action research studies might include ﬂashbacks to historical circumstances that were found to be important long after the research had started and when it was too late to change the research design. Lee and Dennis (2012), in an hermeneutic interpretation of unexpected problems in a Group Support Systems (GSS) laboratory experiment conducted some 14 years previously, tell a remarkable story of what can go wrong when students are used as data subjects. Finally, while ‘storytelling’ is a useful metaphor for the process of narrative writing, we should not take it too far. In ﬁction, it is entirely acceptable to require the reader to ﬁll in the missing gaps, using their imagination and thus facilitating many permutations of a storyline. In research, we tend to ensure that our discussion and conclusion are ﬁrmly anchored in the data: aposiopesis is seldom encouraged, and we do not allow ourselves to wander outside the plot or make unjustiﬁed assertions. Nevertheless, a good story, whether ﬁction or research, will be illustrative and memorable: it will help readers make sense of a situation even to the extent that they can feel themselves observing and participating in it. A good story should spawn future stories, with readers inspired to replicate, critique or extend the research. The narrative affordance of the story may thus transcend current circumstances and open up a vision of a sequel, even if it is written by others. Each of the four papers selected for this issue involves a story that I ﬁnd plausible, illustrative of reality and hence an excellent guide to sensemaking. There are a number of common features to these four papers: each involves some form of control, each addresses the interests of multiple stakeholders, and each makes a novel contribution to research and practice. I am particularly inﬂuenced here by Clarke (2015), who observes all too trenchantly that IS research tends to favour the perspective of the organisation, client or system sponsor, neglecting the perspectives of other, equally legitimate, stakeholders. All four papers in this issue ﬂout this organisational-perspective convention and reveal in their stories the richness that is to be found in research that takes very different perspectives. In the ﬁrst paper, W. Alec Cram, M. Kathryn Brohman and R. Brent Gallupe (Cram et al., 2016) contribute a story that involves the development of a process model of control change in IS. As they explain, while controls are quite normal in IS, controls also need to be modiﬁed in order that they are appropriate for changing IS processes. This is important because controls that do not ﬁt the context may negatively affect business processes and engender unnecessary employee resistance. Controls must therefore be ﬁt for purpose, and the purpose is not
© 2016 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Information Systems Journal 26, 191–194

Editorial

193

exclusively that of corporate management! The authors draw on material from six case studies to develop their new process model. The story of how the process model was developed and how it works is lengthy and complex, but the need for control changes is central and acts as a form of glue, holding together the different threads of the story. Quotations from key participants in the case studies illustrate the parts of the process, effectively shifting the identity of the narrator from the authors to third parties whose views they are using to support their arguments. In the second paper, Julien Malaurent and David Avison (Malaurent & Avison, 2016) tell the story of how top-down headquarters requirements can be balanced with bottom-up local needs in the context of an IS implementation effort at the Chinese branches of a French multinational corporation. A key theme of this story is workarounds: local Chinese employees created workarounds in order to address local cultural and legal requirements; however, the same workarounds violated global corporate norms, rendering nugatory the very beneﬁts that the IS was supposed to deliver. Drawing on Activity Theory, the authors used canonical action research as a methodological lens that governed the storytelling process. Global headquarter clearly has an interest in controlling the behaviour of local employees, even as the same local employees have an interest in maintaining their independence. Malaurent and Avison describe how new controls were developed that addressed both management’s concerns and local employees’ needs for ﬂexibility – needs that had previously resulted in the creation of workarounds. Three pairs of workarounds and the associated new controls are described in detail; the effect is to tell a story that blends both corporate and employee perspectives. In the third paper, Jonas Hedman and Stefan Henningsson (Hedman & Henningsson, 2016) tell the story of how Nordea, a major Scandinavian bank, introduced green IS practices to its operations. In this case, many of the green IS initiatives originate from grass-roots sources, with environmentally aware individuals championing issues to the corporate agenda, where management’s endorsement can be obtained. Here too there are controls, but they originate from the bottom not the top of the organisation. The story line follows two speciﬁc issues where systemic feedback stimulates self-reinforcing sustainability. The larger picture is one of an organisation that transforms itself from paying minimal attention to green issues to one that places sustainability at the heart of its operations, actively seeking ways to reduce its environmental impact. Thus, the key stakeholder is not the organisation but the planet. My interpretation of Nordea’s perspective is that it does not wish to saw off the branch of the tree upon which it is sitting (Botting, 1999). Instead, it wishes to become a carbon-neutral organisation. As a result of the case study analysis, the authors develop a green IS organisational response model, essentially theorising their contribution that merits future analysis in other organisations. In the fourth paper, Yingqin Zheng (2016) considers the socialised affordances of social media in the context of a charitable organisation in China. The story here is a compelling one that is focused on an under-represented sector of society: a grassroot non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides free lunches for children by utilising Sina Weibo, a microblogging tool, in a nationwide charitable programme. Over a 4-year period (2011–2015), the NGO raised nearly 130m yuan (US$20.3m; £13.5m, €18.7m) with 130 000 pupils in schools beneﬁtting. The key actors in this story are the NGO’s founder as well as many volunteers, all building on the affordances of social media to create a success story that does not beneﬁt corporate interests
© 2016 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Information Systems Journal 26, 191–194

194

Editorial

but instead focuses on a neglected but sizable segment of society: malnourished children in poorer areas of China. In China, the social media sector is strictly controlled by both government and the social media providers: NGOs need to tread a ﬁne line, often keeping a low proﬁle, to thrive. The story describes how free lunches for children treads this line successfully, making a signiﬁcant difference to the lives of poor children (cf. Walsham, 2012).

AC K N OW L E D G E M E N T S

I am grateful for the feedback on the ideas I suggest in this editorial received from Gerhard Schwabe, Jonas Hedman, Roger Clarke and Allen Lee.

Robert M. Davison City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
REFERENCES
Bødker, M., Gimpel, G. & Hedman, J. (2014) Time-outtime-in: the dynamics of everyday experiential computing devices. Information Systems Journal, 24, 143–166. Botting, D. (1999) Gerald Durrell: The Authorised Biography. Harper Collins, London, UK. Clarke, R. (2015) Not Only Horses Wear Blinkers: The Missing Perspectives in IS Research, Keynote Address delivered at the 26th Australasian Conference on Information Systems, Adelaide, Australia, Nov 29–Dec 4. Clausen, H. (1994) Designing computer systems from a human perspective: the use of narratives. Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 6, 37–44. Cram, W.A., Brohman, M.K. & Gallpe, R.B. (2016) Hitting a moving target: a process model of information systems control change. Information Systems Journal, 26, 195–226. Hedman, J. & Henningsson, S. (2016) Developing ecological sustainability: a green IS response model. Information Systems Journal, 26, 259–287. Lee, A.S. & Dennis, A.R. (2012) A hermeneutic interpretation of a controlled laboratory experiment: a case study of decision making with a group support system. Information Systems Journal, 22, 3–27. Malaurent, J. & Avison, D.E. (2016) Rewconciling global and local needs: a canonical action research project to deal with workarounds. Information Systems Journal, 26, 227–287. Serafeimidis, V. & Smithson, S. (2003) Information systems evaluation as an organizational institution – experience from a case study. Information Systems Journal, 13, 251–274. Trauth, E.M. (2015) Editorial. Information Systems Journal, 24, 67–69. Walsham, G. (2012) Are We Making a better world with ICTs? Reﬂections on a future agenda for the IS ﬁeld. Journal of Information Technology, 27, 87–93. Zheng, Y.Q. (2016) Affordances of social media in collective action: the case of free lunch for children in china. Information Systems Journal, 26, 289–313.

© 2016 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Information Systems Journal 26, 191–194

