Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Strategic Information Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jsis

Governing innovation in U.S. state government: An ecosystem perspective
Gregory S. Dawson a,⇑, James S. Denford b, Kevin C. Desouza c
a

W.P. Carey School of Business/Center for Organization Research and Design, Arizona State University, 400 East Lemon, BA223L, Tempe, AZ 85028, United States Management & Economics Department, Royal Military College of Canada, Canada c School of Public Affairs, Arizona State University, United States
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t
In the public sector, the strategic quest for IT-based innovation often starts by hiring a successful private sector CIO and hoping his or her prior experience will transfer. However this often ignores the existence and inﬂuence of other entities and IT governance structures that form the innovation ecosystem. Applying the legal view of agency theory to the U.S. state innovation ecosystem and using a crisp-set Qualitative Comparative Analysis (csQCA) approach, we investigate factors that are associated with public sector IT-based innovation. We ﬁnd that CIO characteristics, structural oversight mechanisms, CIO relationships with authorities, and the state environment combine to form conﬁgurations that lead to both high and low performance. Ó 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Article history: Received 7 April 2015 Received in revised form 18 July 2016 Accepted 1 August 2016 Available online 17 August 2016 Keywords: Chief Information Ofﬁcers Organizational Innovation IT governance Legal view of agency theory Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) Ecosystem

1. Introduction1 ‘‘Bureaucracy destroys initiative. There is little that bureaucrats hate more than innovation, especially innovation that produces better results than the old routines. Improvements always make those at the top of the heap look inept. Who enjoys appearing inept?” [Frank Herbert, Heretics of Dune] Public and private sector leaders see innovation, which Dawson and Denford (2015) deﬁne as ‘‘[breaking] the mold on current trends to become more efﬁcient and effective” (p. 8), as the key to improved organizational performance (Damanpour and Schneider, 2008). Information technology (IT) innovation is seen as a key enabler by which innovation occurs and this innovation is critical to both public and private sector organizational success (Desouza and Bhagwatwar, 2012; Swanson, 1994). Thus, IT-based innovation results whenever IT is the enabler of innovation (operand resource) or is the trigger for innovation (operant resource) (Nambisan et al., 2014). In the private sector, IT-based innovations such as Google’s semi-autonomous car, Amazon’s drone delivery and Uber’s ride sharing are transforming entire industries. However, innovation is also revolutionizing the public sector where analytics and data mining are improving predictive policing (Desouza, 2014), citizen engagement platforms are creating a real two-way conversation between citizens and public ofﬁcials (Williamson and Fung, 2004) and open data platforms have increased transparency and promoted crowdsourcing
⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: GregorySDawson@gmail.com (G.S. Dawson), Jim.Denford@rmc.ca (J.S. Denford), Kevin.Desouza@asu.edu (K.C. Desouza). The authors wish to acknowledge and thank the two anonymous reviewers and Robert D. Galliers for their challenging and helpful comments throughout the process. We believe that the paper is immeasurably strengthened because of them and we are very appreciative.
1

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2016.08.003 0963-8687/Ó 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

300

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

of solutions (Mergel and Desouza, 2013). At present, the dominant paradigm in private sector IT-based innovation, the economic rational model, has reached a point of rapidly diminishing returns (Costello et al., 2013; Swanson, 1994) and likely does not apply to the public sector. IT governance deals with the leadership, processes and structures that ensure that IT meets organizational goals and objectives (De Haes and Van Grembergen, 2009). However, the governance decisions, structures and relationships developed to design, plan and control IS-enabled innovation and transformation are often viewed as a black box and requiring further investigation (Besson and Rowe, 2012). IT governance mechanisms have been found to indirectly impact IT value creation (Bradley et al., 2012), with several mediators for that relationship being proposed including strategic alignment (De Haes and Van Grembergen, 2009; Wu et al., 2015) and IT capabilities (Prasad et al., 2010). However, one that has not been mooted is innovation. Hence, a new examination that is oriented towards the key IT-based innovation players and IT governance structures in the public sector and their relationship with both innovation and organizational outcomes is necessary and timely. Scholars trace the birth of research on innovation to Joseph Schumpeter’s 1934 work on economic and social change (Costello et al., 2013). Initially Schumpeter believed that innovation was led by far-seeing individuals but his views later evolved to see large corporations as the primary leaders of innovation (Lazonick, 2005). However, in the U.S. public sector, an individual ‘‘savior complex” ideology still exists and many public sector organizations bring in a private sector CIO to jump start IT-based innovation. For example, Teresa Takai spent 30 years working for Ford Motor Company before becoming CIO of Michigan and then California while Todd Nacapuy, CIO of the State of Hawaii, spent a number of years at Microsoft and EDS. Finally, Bill McCluggage, CIO of the government of Ireland, spent a number of years ﬂipping between government service and private industry. In short, transplanted private sector CIOs are not just found in the US federal government. Unfortunately, the transplanting of private sector CIOs to the public sector often ignores the observation that CIO success in one organization does not always lead to the same in another (Peppard, 2010) and may be hampered by a lack of understanding of the public sector. In a comparison of the state government CIOs from California, Massachusetts and Virginia, the research showed that these state-level CIOs had more in common with other public sector CIOs than they had with CIOs from private industry (Dawson and Kauffman, 2010; Dawson and Kauffman, 2011; Dawson et al., 2015). This is likely because effective IT support of the business is often predicated on the CIO’s knowledge and understanding of the business (Reich and Benbasat, 2000); in many cases, private sector CIOs may not sufﬁciently understand the business of government they ﬁnd themselves in. As Chun and Mooney (2009) observe, ‘‘CIO’s have oriented and tailored their roles and responsibilities to match the IS infrastructure and strategy of the ﬁrm, having a profound impact on the evolution of the IS executives’ roles and responsibilities” (p. 330). In addition, many of these transplants are simply unprepared for the attention that is given to a public sector CIO. For example, Kirstin Russell, formerly with Oracle, was appointed the CIO of the State of Colorado with a massive transformational ‘‘to do” list and a host of innovative ideas. However, after just three years and some highly publicized allegations of a misconduct regarding a business deal that beneﬁted her husband, Russell returned to the private sector. Investigating the strategic impact of the CIO in creating IT-based innovation in the public sector seems potentially rewarding, particular considering private sector research that would support this relationship (cf. such as in the heavily government-regulated health industry as identiﬁed by Leidner et al., 2010). After all, an effective CIO can reduce operational costs, improve inventory cycle time, optimize supply chains and foster development of strategic products and services (Ross and Feeny, 2000). Hence, a CIO should have a strong inﬂuence on creating innovation and helping to transform their organization, but, at present, little scholarly research has examined the role of the CIO of encouraging innovation in the public sector, particularly at the state level. While some work has been done looking at characteristics of effective state government CIOs (Dawson and Watson, 2011), CIOs remain a set of state leaders that have not been sufﬁciently understood or researched. This is surprising given the well-established relationship between IT investment and improved performance in the public sector (Pang, 2014). As such, CIOs are important public managers and research is needed to understand their inﬂuence on innovation in the context of their relationships, IT governance structures and environment. Thus, our research questions are: (1) What role do the CIO, the state’s environment, the CIO’s relationship with the Governor and the structural constraints of the state legislature have in creating innovation and (2) What relationship does innovation have with positive state-level outcomes. While a great deal has been written on innovation in the private sector, this paper breaks new ground by looking at these strategic management issues in state government. Given that the US state and local government IT spending is currently $60.4b in 2014 and is expected to grow at a rate of 3.3% for the next decade (to $70b) (Dixon, 2014), such an examination is overdue. To address this question, we draw on sociology research methods that were developed speciﬁcally to address the small-n issues that accompany state-level research due to difﬁculties in analysis caused by ﬁnite populations (Ragin, 2000). This methodology has been introduced in the IT literature (Rivard and Lapointe, 2012), but has not yet become mainstream in spite of calls for methodological pluralism in IT to advance new genres (Avital et al., 2012). As such, we take this opportunity to contribute to the IT literature by increasing exposure to an emerging conﬁgurational methodology in addition to extending the concept of innovation ecosystems in the public sector IT domain.

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

301

2. Literature review 2.1. IT in the public sector IT has transformed most aspects of how public agencies run their operations, deliver services, and manage public goods (Desouza and Dawson, 2015). Advances in technology led to transformations in public sector governance approaches from the interest in e-government to open and transparent governance, and the growing interest in m-government (the use of apps and mobile technology for civic engagement and local government) (Chopra, 2014; Desouza and Bhagwatwar, 2014). All trends indicate that our public agencies will intensify their dependence on IT into the foreseeable future. Ultimately however, IT is just a tool, and will not create value in and of itself. The governance of IT is critical to ensure that IT is managed and leveraged effectively towards the attainment of organizational goals and furthering the agency mission objectives. IT governance carries a signiﬁcant role in the public sector as it is the structure of the relationships, processes, and mechanism used in the public sector to develop and direct IT strategies and resources allocations to achieve the goals and objectives of an agency (Campbell et al., 2010). IT is not just signiﬁcant to the use and proliferation of technology through the structure and management of public sector agencies but also for considerations or reconsiderations of theories on public organizations. The leadership aspect of IT governance is a key consideration in achieving organizational success. Due to the expensive and arduous task of undertaking new IT projects, their successful implementation in the public sector is often the result of an internal champion for technological innovations (Beath, 1991). A leader and champion within the organization, such as a CIO, is able to help their organization navigate both internal and external challenges by bringing to bear a unique skill set incorporating both technical and business acumen. In recognition of the need for more IT champions and concerns of the government’s future procurement of IT, the U.S. Congress passed the Clinger-Cohen Act (CCA) in the late 1990s. The CCA mandates that all executive agencies develop capital planning and investments controls, implement IT projects to enhance performance, and establish CIOs. However, although the CCA provided a well-intentioned mandate to curtail ﬁnancial waste and boost organizational success of IT projects, the Act did not consider the organizational challenges across the public sector and the biggest challenge to the implementation of the CCA is not technical but rather is largely governance related (Liu and Hwang, 2003). This US federal act was both in response to and swiftly followed by similar legislation at the state level. The processes of IT governance in the public sector are also important to consider, particularly how they may differ from the private sector due to the implicit cultural constraints that shape the public service environment. Bozeman and Bretschneider (1986) note that the culture within government agencies is extremely risk averse. A reason for the aversion to risk is the public nature of the public sector and how success or failure is measured. Regardless of how failure is measured, when it comes to IT, the public sector has a poor track record (Goldﬁnch, 2007). One of the key reasons for these failures is the lack of adequate IT project management and governance (Purao et al., 2012), despite the fact that many in the public sector look to ‘best practices’ to help shape their IT governance (Campbell et al., 2010; Caudle et al., 1991). However, these best practices are often modeled after efforts in the private sector, and seldom account for nuances found in the public sector. Bozeman and Bretschneider (1986) hypothesized that public and private sectors required different approaches to management and that a one-size-ﬁts-all approach to processes and practices was not appropriate in the public sector. Utilizing best practices that are aimed at increasing proﬁt does not necessarily ﬁt in the public sector and can actually be harmful to administration. The ﬁnal part of IT governance is the structural component. The public sector is tied to a set of rules put in place to protect the public but those rules can also constrain agencies (Bozeman, 1993), so there is a balance between oversight and autonomy to be struck. With the implementation of FITARA over top of CCA, public sector CIOs are gaining increasing authority and resources to execute their mandate while being held more accountable for by elected ofﬁcials. That accountability is often implemented through structural mechanisms designed to create oversight of IT activities. Early developments such as the CCA acknowledged the need for CIOs and experienced managers to manage their agency’s portfolio for maximum success under appropriate supervision. It is against this backdrop that innovation occurs. However, there is also a risk of treating the public sector as homogenous rather than understanding salient differences between the different levels of government. The Founding Fathers of the United States clearly understood the tension between federal government and state government and wanted to avoid creating a state government structure with a purpose and set of values that conﬂicted with the federal government (Box, 1999). Because of this, the line between federal and state government responsibilities is generally clear. However, there is only scant research on the operational differences between federal, state and local CIO. Dawson et al. (2015) examined the job tenure of federal, state and local CIOs (as well as Fortune 500) and found statistically signiﬁcant differences in tenure for CIOs across the domains. In general, local government CIOs lasted the longest while federal CIOs last the shortest. In a comparison of the state government CIOs from California, Massachusetts and Virginia, the research showed that these state-level CIOs had more in common with other public sector CIOs than they had with CIOs from private industry (Dawson and Kauffman, 2010; Dawson and Kauffman, 2011; Dawson et al., 2015). As Chun and Mooney (2009) observe, ‘‘CIO’s have oriented and tailored their roles and responsibilities to match the IS infrastructure and strategy of the ﬁrm, having a profound impact on the evolution of the IS executives’ roles and responsibilities” (p. 330).In short, research on public sector CIOs also need to pay attention to differences within the different domains of the public sector.

302

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

2.2. Theoretical basis In studying how managers serving a higher authority meet organizational objectives and interact with bodies that oversee them, an important management theory lens is agency theory. Under agency theory, an agent performs actions on behalf of the principal, who must delegate a degree of responsibility to the agent (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). Under the classical agency theory perspective, the shareholders are the principals and the board of directors acts as their agent to oversee management; a second principal-agent relationship then also exists between the board (principal) and the ﬁrm’s management (agent). Given that agents can shirk (Alchian and Demsetz, 1972) or be opportunistic (Williamson, 1985), the principal must carefully monitor and control them (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). Thus, the focus of classical agency theory is to determine the best contract governing the principal-agent relationship, considering problems of organizational goal conﬂict, participants’ self-interest and information asymmetry (Eisenhardt, 1989). The ﬁrst problem arises when ‘‘the desires or goals of the principal and agent conﬂict and . . . it is difﬁcult or expensive for the principal to verify what the agent is actually doing” (Eisenhardt, 1989, p. 58). Self-interest rears its head in the problem of moral hazard, which refers to ‘‘the lack of effort on the part of the agent,” as classical agency theory posits that it is in the agent’s best-interest to minimize their activities on behalf of the principal (Eisenhardt, 1989, p. 61). Exacerbating both these problems is the existence of information asymmetries, as the agency relationship is particularly opaque and generally inaccessible to surveillance (Shapiro, 2005). The principal has two options for determining an agent’s unobservable behavior: to discover the behavior through investment in information systems or to contract on the outcome of the agent’s behavior (Eisenhardt, 1989). Thus, under classical agency theory, the role of the board of directors is to develop control mechanisms to ensure that management acts in method that is consistent with the board. It is interesting to note that, within the private sector, control actions taken by the board have little if any impact on the performance of the organization (Hillman et al., 2000; Hillman and Dalziel, 2003; Lan and Heracleous, 2010). While some managers are opportunistic, the proposition that all managers are opportunistic is probably unfounded (Williamson, 1993). In the public sector, we believe this dim view is even less appropriate due to the concept of public service motivation (PSM). Perry and Wise (1990) deﬁne PSM as an individual’s demonstration of altruism or prosocial motivation, which can be seen in areas including but not limited to a willingness to forego higher pay that is possible in the private sector, in order to help establish public policy and serve the public good. Two key assumptions underlie PSM: different work characteristics exist in the public sector than in the private sector and these sector differences are related to worker motivation (Wright, 2001). A host of scholars have argued that employees (in all sectors) are more likely to join organizations that are consistent with their own personal values and needs and, following this, the public sector is more likely to attract individuals that are drawn to what the public sector can provide (Perry, 1996; Perry and Wise, 1990). Thus, given that the public sector has a mission to improve society, it is logical that the public sector would have more employees with greater altruistic motives (Wright, 2001). It should be noted that PSM as a concept is not the opposite of self-interest, but rather orthogonal to it (De Dreu, 2006). Therefore, while public servants derive value from serving public interests, they have the same needs for achievement and recognition as do members of the private sector (Grant, 2008), and therefore principal-agent issues may still arise, but in a potentially different form than normally seen in the classical agency theory literature. However, given the general acceptance of PSM within the public sector literature, we posit that an alternative conceptualization of agency theory that accepts goal alignment, driven by PSM, rather than pure opportunism between principal and agent is more appropriate than classical agency theory. Such an alternative conceptualization is legal agency theory.2 Under the legal view of agency theory, the existence of a corporate personality exists and accepts ﬁrms as social institutions and not merely a nexus of contracts. In this view, the ethical principles of trust, trustworthiness and cooperativeness could lead to competitive advantage as the opportunism expected by classical agency theory is seen as a deadweight loss burden through its requirement to maintain regulation and legal services related to ex ante cheating. Within such a view, managers would not be disinterested in their own beneﬁt, but rather would see higher utility in collective, cooperative behavior than in individualistic, self-serving behavior (Davis et al., 1997). While retaining the concepts of principal and agent, legal agency theory redeﬁnes roles to align with the legal constraints on institutions. Under this model, the role of principal shifts from the shareholders to the corporation itself as there is legal precedent for directors to act to promote the beneﬁts of the corporation as a whole including a variety of stakeholders in addition to shareholders such as creditors, customers, suppliers and the community (Lan and Heracleous, 2010). In addition, due to their ﬁduciary responsibilities, boards of directors cannot be agents of shareholders as they legally must be able to exercise that responsibility free from obligation or obedience to shareholders (Blair and Stout, 2001). Finally, the role of the board under legal agency shifts from being the monitor of management on behalf of the shareholders to being the mediator between the competing claims of the corporation amongst shareholders, management, creditors, suppliers and consumers in order to guard against mutual opportunism between each (Blair and Stout, 2001; Lan and Heracleous, 2010). Table 1 summarizes the salient differences between classical and legal agency theories (Eisenhardt, 1989; Lan and Heracleous, 2010).

2 Another plausible theory lens is stewardship theory, which also minimizes the problem of opportunism. However, stewardship theory has been criticized for envisioning an almost mythological creature of pure virtue (Albanese et al., 1997; Arthurs and Busenitz, 2003) and, in our opinion, is too extreme.

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318 Table 1 Classical and legal agency theories. Classical agency theory Main themes      Shareholder as principal Goal incongruence Primacy of shareholders Monitoring and control-oriented oversight Self-interested rational actors Legal agency theory     

303

Corporation as principal Goal alignment Primacy of directors Mediating and balancing oversight Initial trust of actors

We believe that the legal agency theory is appropriate in the context of our current study and is transferrable to the public sector. While elected by constituents and responsive to their needs, elected ofﬁcials have a ﬁduciary responsibility to the state itself (Rave, 2013), paralleling the legal agency relationships between shareholders, the board of directors and the corporation itself. Similarly, both elected ofﬁcials and public servants are generally imbued with PSM and so are less prone to shirking and opportunism (Kelman, 1987). Finally, in working towards the state’s goals, the administration and legislature – serving in the same role as a private sector board – and the public service – representing management – must balance the needs of citizens, higher federal and lower municipal partners, private sector suppliers and the state as a whole in carrying out their duties. In carrying out those duties appropriately with the various actors, they can have a positive impact on outcomes for the state and, as we argue below, create an environment for innovation as part of the innovation ecosystem. 2.3. Innovation ecosystem model Innovation can be studied within an individualist, structuralist or interactive process perspective (Slappendale, 1996) and these multi-level dimensions have yielded an ecological view on innovation which incorporates all three perspectives. An ecological orientation studies the relationship of an organism to its environment (d’Ydewalle, 2006) and can be expanded to see the interconnected relationship between an individual with other individuals within their environment (von Bertalanffy, 1968). Thus, in studies of innovation, it is important to understand each of the key actors as well as the role of the environment in creating and supporting (or discouraging) innovation. This concept is aligned with the concept of open innovation espoused by Chesbrough (2013) who examines not only the major actor performing the innovation (in our case, the CIO) but also the other key stakeholders that are involved in supporting the innovation. Further, as noted by Dawson and Denford (2015) in their study on innovation within the federal government, innovation in the public sector needs to be a team sport and, while the CIO is responsible for enabling innovation, innovation requires the involvement of numerous other stakeholders. Hence, a study of innovation requires investigating not merely how each element contributes to innovation but how each element contributes to innovation in the presence of and in combination with other elements. While we are mindful of the role of the CIO, we also consider the environment in which the state government CIO operates. Costello et al. (2013) proposed an ecosystem model of innovation has four distinct parts: the personal dimension of the innovator which focuses on key individual characteristics, the interpersonal dimension which looks at the work teams and social networks that surround the innovator, the organizational dimension which looks at characteristics of the organization and the socio-economic which looks at external players. This model shares a great deal of commonality with the IT business value model proposed by Melville et al. (2004) that describes the innovation ecosystem that includes the ﬁrms, its external partners, the industry and the environment also proposes a direct link from information systems to organizational performance. Because no known empirical studies on public sector innovation have developed a robust ecosystem model, we applied the Costello et al.’s (2013) ecological framework to ﬁt the public sector, remaining thematically consistent with it while focusing on critical IT governance elements. For IT- based innovation, the primary organism of interest is the CIO since the CIO is primarily responsible for setting the IT strategic direction within the public sector (Smaltz et al., 2006). Thus, with an ecological orientation, we look at the CIO and the CIO’s interactions with the environment and other collaborators within the ecosystem. Speciﬁcally, we examine the characteristics of the CIO (personal dimension of the agent), the relationship of the CIO to the Governor (interpersonal dimension with the senior elected ofﬁcial), the structure (organizational dimension with the elected legislative oversight bodies that serve as a proxy for the board of directors that surrounds the CIO), and the environment within the state that the CIO operates (socio-economic dimension with the citizen as shareholders) that make up the key features of the IT governance within the state. With each entity within the ecosystem, we focus on the relationship between the entity and innovation in order to understand the value that each element brings. By doing so, we link the legal view of agency theory with the ecosystem model. Fig. 1 shows our conceptual ecosystem in creating innovation. 2.4. CIO personal characteristics CIOs are key contributors to creating an organizational culture of innovation, working with their peer senior leaders to bring it to fruition (Watts and Henderson, 2006). Upper echelon theory (Hambrick and Mason, 1984) suggests that a manager’s personal characteristics including education, age and tenure can inﬂuence strategic choices and organizational performance. Education is an observable characteristic that can be indicative of an executive’s knowledge and skills (Hambrick and

304

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

Fig. 1. Innovation ecosystem.

Mason, 1984). CIOs with different formal educations may develop different problem-solving skills and mental models (Hitt and Tyler, 1991). The different type of formal education for CIOs can be categorized as technical or business based (Armstrong and Sambamurthy, 1999), where technical education is grounded in the IT discipline whereas business education is focused on non-technical administrative and leadership skills (Goles et al., 2008). For age and tenure, two different perspectives of these characteristics exist: whether they increase conservatism or ability to act. In one view, organizational leaders tend to become more conservative as their tenure lengthens (Musteen et al., 2006). Executives can narrow their view of strategic change and solidify into a set of strategies they are comfortable with that may less and less match the requirements of their environments, becoming ’stale in the saddle’ (Miller, 1991). In addition, both older and longer tenured executives may also increase in psychological commitment to the status quo, thus becoming less innovative (Hambrick and Mason, 1984). Finally, this conservatism serves a purpose of reducing organizational performance variations, in that longer tenure and older executives tend to follow industry norms while shorter tenured and younger counterparts experiment and are either rewarded or punished more than their longer term peers (Hambrick and Mason, 1984). In the second view, the more experienced CIO understands the needs of the state better than a recent appointee and understands the mechanisms – ﬁnancial and political – that allow IT policy to be implemented. This view is supported by more recent studies that have found the popular perspective of young, recently appointed executives as risk-takers is not accurate. Rather, longer-tenured, well-seasoned executives with deep knowledge of the ﬁrm and its environment are, in fact, more likely to take innovative actions (Simsek, 2007). This has been attributed to the executive acquiring more ﬁrm- and jobspeciﬁc skills and knowledge, thus increasing their competence and conﬁdence in strategic decision-making. It may suggest that a CIO who is promoted from within may be more successful as he or she knows the inner workings of the bureaucracy and has a network of relationship with key ﬁgures while the external CIO must learn how to navigate an entirely new system and quickly establish a network. While the two views of age and tenure remain in tension in the literature, we posit that differentiation of CIO attributes matter and we suggest that each state-level CIO will have personal characteristics that will enhance the possibility of innovation by the state. In fact, it is the match between the organization’s strategy (Li et al., 2013) or organizational environment (Brown and Paulus, 1996) and the CIO’s personal characteristics that is important rather than the characteristics themselves. As such, the ecological perspective makes these CIO personal characteristics highly suitable for this study. 2.5. Structural considerations Structural issues are also present in the states. In some states, technology is overseen by committees of the state legislature while other states do not use such oversight-based governance mechanisms. Highly IT knowledgeable and active boards (Leidner et al., 2010) and IT steering committees (Bowen et al., 2007) have been shown to either drive or constrain IT decisions, but in either case they have a signiﬁcant impact on the CIO’s ability to enact strategy. Similarly, capable IT steering committees have been seen to build capabilities (Prasad et al., 2010) or create positive IT-business relationships (Huang et al., 2010) that positively impact IT and ﬁrm performance. Additionally, administrations may differ on their view of the role of government in society, where some may take a free-market view while others will be more directly interventionist. This difference in perspective can result in different structures in the implementation of policy and legislation. Consider the case of Florida, which at the time of writing this paper, is the only state government in the U.S. without a state-level CIO position.

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

305

Florida has gone through several IT transitions over the years without CIO leadership and the state legislature is largely in charge of the state’s IT management. As a result, each department generally fends for itself and any incoming CIO will need to deal with a legislature that tried to abolish it, a Governor that will not fund it and individual departments with technology ﬁefdoms: a daunting challenge for any CIO. Overall, there is considerable variation in the structure of how technology is governed across the states and we posit that these structures are not all equally effective in creating innovation. Applying the legal view of agency theory provides support for the role of the various actors in the innovation ecosystem. Under the classic view of agency theory, the state legislature – operating in the constraining role of a private sector board of directors – is concerned with constraining possible opportunistic actions of, among others, the CIO. That is, they act as a ﬁrst order agent rather than, as envisioned by the legal view of agency theory, as an ‘‘autonomous ﬁduciary” (Lan and Heracleous, 2010, p. 295). In the role of autonomous ﬁduciary, the board is entrusted and empowered to act on behalf of the shareholders but their autonomy is derived from the fact that they are not directly controlled by any party, including the shareholders (Blair and Stout, 2001). Some terminology used to explicate legal agency theory is problematic for the public sector – shareholders and boards of directors do not exist. However, certain government entities such as legislative oversight committees (LOC) and formally-established IT steering committees take on responsibilities that are, in many respects, comparable to the board of directors. Thus, we believe that higher levels of LOC involvement and greater use of other mechanisms such as IT steering committees are likely to result in greater levels of innovation since they act as the mediating structures to enable innovation to occur. As a result, we would expect that a supportive IT governance structure will provide greater clarity into the direction of the business and will enable the CIO to build innovation that is in harmony with the business goals of the state rather than conﬂict with them. Hence, a solid IT governance structure should promote greater innovation and this innovation should lead to better state level outcomes. 2.6. Relational considerations We suggest that the Governor is a key player in the creation of innovation within a state. As the single most powerful elected ofﬁcial at the state level, the Governor can do much to enhance the creation of innovation within the state. Some evidence supports this from the federal government where the agency director – the key business user – is central to the implementation of innovation and the CIO alone is generally not capable of implementing innovation but requires an ecosystem (which involves the agency director) to create meaningful innovation (Dawson and Denford, 2015). While this work is from the federal government, we think the idea is apt for state government. In a study on CIO tenure, Dawson et al. (2015) adopted Cyert and March’s dominant coalition model (1963) to the public sector and, for a department level CIO in state government, discussed the parallels between the dominant coalition model of the agency director (CEO), deputy director of administration (COO) and the budget director (CFO). We apply this to the higher level within state government and suggest that, within state government, the Governor serves in the role of the CEO for state government and that is a key relationship for the CIO. Thus, the CIO’s relationship with the Governor should be a key relationship in the creation of innovation within the state. Our basis for this relationship parallels the research in the private sector that shows that the CIO’s relationship with the senior ofﬁcial, the CEO, is critical to the CIO’s success (Dawson and Watson, 2011; Preston and Karahanna, 2009; Smaltz et al., 2006). Gupta (1991) traces the evolution of the IT from a support function to a critical resource for ﬁrm success and discusses how the relationship between the CIO and the CEO has similarly evolved. When IT was simply a support function, the CIO (often referred to as simply a data processing manager in the late 1980s) was somewhat unimportant to the CEO since IT did not provide any strategically valuable services. However, as IT evolved to be central in a ﬁrm’s competitive strategy, both in back ofﬁce applications and direct service delivery, the nature of the relationship changed between the CIO and the CEO and become a strategic partnership (Gupta, 1991). Peppard (2010) makes the same point by in saying that a successful working relationship between these positions is all about personal relationships rather than technical skills. Consider the case of the Michigan, where a strong relationship between Michigan CIO David Behen and Governor Rick Snyder has led to several innovations within the State. As the former Chairman of Gateway Inc., Governor Snyder appreciated the value of having a robust IT infrastructure. CIO Behen, as a ten-year veteran of public service at the county level and former President of a small technology company, was appointed as CIO by Governor Snyder and collaborated actively with him on several ﬂagship technology efforts. For instance, in 2012, Michigan developed a $2.5 million innovation fund that provided an investment into innovative technology collaborations between state and local government with the intent of bringing forth technology projects that probably wouldn’t happen otherwise. In addition, the Governor allocated millions of dollars to new IT upgrades designed to innovate in areas of cost control and service delivery to citizens such as a Medicaid Management Information System and an upgrade cyber-command center developed to respond to emergencies. We suggest that a close relationship between the Governor and the CIO results in better alignment between the Governor’s business goals for the state and the enacted technology vision and effort by the CIO and creates a higher probability that the project will be funded. As former Maryland Governor Martin O’Malley describes in his usage of big data to solve problems within the state, Governors and technologists need to work together to solve the problems of citizens (O’Malley, 2014). For example, O’Malley (2014) said, ‘‘. . .soon it became easy to ﬁnd natural collaborations, missed connections, and new opportunities for progress and growth” (p. 555). This suggests that the Governor, in addition to being the senior elected ofﬁcial, also operates as a mediating hierarch as envisioned by the legal view of agency theory. While prior usage of legal agency theory has focused on the board as the

306

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

mediating hierarch, we suggest that, in addition to the legislature acting in this role (as discussed in the structural section), the Governor also acts in that role. Unlike a CEO who is appointed or dismissed by the board and serves as the agent to the board’s principal, the role performed by the Governor within state government is different. Within state government, the Governor is also elected by the citizens of the state and is no way accountable to the legislature. Thus, the Governor is not subordinate to the legislature and both branches of government need to work together to pass legislation. As such, we argue that the Governor also serves as a separate mediating hierarch that operates in parallel with the legislature operating in that role. Like we envisioned with the legislature, the Governor also acts as ‘‘autonomous ﬁduciary” that is not beholden to any group (other than the citizens that elected him/her). As such, a close relationship with the Governor – who is serving as the mediating hierarch, should allow for greater access to resources and thus promote greater innovation. 2.7. Environmental considerations The CIO, the LOC and the Governor are inﬂuenced by demographic (ecological) characteristics within the state. Given that states have different levels of education, size, wealth and tech-savvy, we posit that the environment characteristics will inﬂuence innovation by the state. Within legal agency theory, the health of the principal should impact how the mediating hierarchs balance the competing claims; in this case, the executive and legislative branches may consider the resource position of the state and its citizens when making allocative decisions to implement policy. Within the private sector, most organizations that implement innovation due it to capture a competitive advantage and there are numerous examples of organizations successfully creating a ﬁrst mover advantage with innovation. The public sector does not have a comparable imperative of competitive advantage because, as a State of California CIO was quoted as saying, it is not like you can drive to Nevada to get a California driver’s license (Dawson and Watson, 2011). Nonetheless, environment does matter within the public sector and various social and economic forces drive actions by the state. For example, in summer 2014, the State of Iowa launched a cloud-based unemployment app to serve Iowa’s uniquely unemployed workforce. Many Iowans hold farming, manufacturing, and other seasonal jobs based in rural areas. During the year, these workers routinely ﬁle unemployment claims in fall and winter. The app is expected to assist the state with cutting hours of overtime, errors, identity theft, fraud, and saving money (Sepulvado, 2014). Other states, such as Massachusetts are focusing their attention on leveraging emerging technologies (e.g. mobile and social media) by leverage partnerships within the state (Sweden, 2014). As Bill Oates, CIO of Massachusetts points out, ‘‘. . .nobody can do this stuff on their own. The only way we’re really going to change government is if we take our anecdotes of collaboration and turn it into something much bigger” (Wood, 2014). Both examples demonstrate how unique problems of the state can lead to ITbased innovation in the service of the public. In summary, we situate this study in a public sector context, using the legal view of agency theory and an ecological model to investigate the phenomenon of state CIO-led innovation. Based on the integration of these three literatures, we propose that IT-based innovation is related to the state CIO’s personal characteristics and the structural, relational and environmental conditions that surround him or her. It should be noted that IT-based innovation and transformation are risky endeavors and not all are successful, therefore it is important to consider cases of failure as well as success (Besson and Rowe, 2012). As such, we build two separate propositions since, using conﬁgurational logic and assumptions of causal complexity, conﬁrmation of one proposition does not automatically assure disconﬁrmation of the other. Proposition 1A. There are synergistic conﬁgurations of personal, structural, relational and environmental characteristics that lead to high IT-based innovation in the public sector. Proposition 1B. There are antagonistic conﬁgurations of personal, structural, relational and environmental characteristics that lead to low IT-based innovation in the public sector. 2.8. Outcomes of innovation Finally, we posit that innovation will ultimately beneﬁt the state and we suggest that these beneﬁts will be felt in the overall performance of the state and base this belief on Melville’s (2004) IT business value model that suggests that IT leads to improved organizational outcomes. This relationship between organization action and overall performance is commonly seen within the public sector under the concept of New Public Management (NPM). Under NPM, the role of government is to take actions that improve the performance of government under a number of service delivery criterion including quantity and quality of outputs, efﬁciency, value for money and customer satisfaction (Forbes and Lynn, 2005). Given the strength of the relationship between innovation and performance in the private sector, we expect that the public sector would also undertake innovation in order to improve organizational outcomes. For example, in their report on innovation in the federal government, Dawson and Denford (2015) relate how Dorine Andrews, former CIO of the Peace Corps, used technical and process innovations to reduce the time that it took for the Peace Corps to implement new technologies in other, much-less developed countries where the Peace Corps is active. They also describe how David Bray, CIO of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), used innovative approaches to reduce

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

307

the cost to develop a new customer management system at the FCC. In both cases, Andrews and Bray undertook innovation to improve the functioning of the organization and were successful in doing so. Thus we posit that higher levels of innovation yield more positive state-level outcomes, as expressed in the following proposition: Proposition 2. High levels of innovation are positively linked to organizational performance.

3. Methodology The methodology section is divided into a methodology outline and a data set description. 3.1. Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) Conﬁgurational approaches are based on the primacy of the individual case and the value that case brings on its own merit and when combined with similar cases. This is a different basic assumption from correlational approaches, which are based upon the primacy of the individual variable and how all cases are related to it (Ragin and Rihoux, 2004). Conﬁgurational approaches are also based on the belief that it is rarely a single variable (a necessary and sufﬁcient condition) that leads directly to an optimum outcome; rather, the complexities of real organizations necessitate combinations of factors (INUS3 conditions) to yield an outcome (Rihoux and De Meur, 2009). For example, one may hypothesize that resources and vision are required for a particular project to be successful; both are necessary but neither is sufﬁcient to ensure project success. Given the focus is on individual cases and a range of factors representing them, conﬁgurational approaches have developed around small-n applications, where rich data is available (Ragin, 2000). Conﬁgurational approaches have been found effective in areas such as sociology (Ragin, 1987), public administration (Andrew et al., 2016) and strategic management (Ragin and Fiss, 2008). Given this, we believe that QCA is an appropriate methodology for this study. The expectation that individual antecedents (monocausality) can lead to a single optimum outcome (uniﬁnality) is at the core of variance theories (Ragin, 2000). But, in contrast, the identiﬁcation that various combinations of antecedents (causal complexity) can lead to the same outcome (equiﬁnality) is the basis for conﬁguration theories (Ragin, 2000). Using the project analogy again, there may be many different visions and resource packages that could still lead to a successful project. Monocausal conditions either positively or negatively contribute to the outcome in all cases, whereas under causal complexity multiple simultaneous conditions may be required to cause an outcome and some conditions can lead to positive outcomes in certain conﬁgurations and negative outcomes in others (Meyer et al., 1993). Similarly, the expectation of uniﬁnality is that there is one set of conditions that leads to the best outcome (and conversely, the worst outcome when lacking the conditions), whereas equiﬁnality allows for multiple different paths to be followed. Finally, Fiss (2011) identiﬁes conditions with evidence of strong causal relationships with outcomes as ‘‘core” and those with weaker relationships as ‘‘peripheral”, so there are some critical conﬁguration elements around which more minor elements contribute. Set-theoretic methods use Boolean algebra to operationalize conﬁgurational theories (Fiss, 2007). The core elements of set-theoretic methods are the use of case memberships in sets, the perception of the phenomenon of interest in terms of set relationships, and the interpretation of relationship in terms of sufﬁciency and necessity (Schneider and Wagemann, 2010). Case membership derives from researchers identifying a meaningful variable of interest and assigning the case to it. Interpretation of the phenomenon of state IT-based innovation in terms of set relationships necessitate examining conﬁgurations of personal, structural, relational and environmental factors, thus operationalizing our proposed innovation ecosystem. Finally, the concept of conﬁgurations leads to examination as to whether or not a condition is necessary for the outcome to occur and if it is sufﬁcient to cause it by itself, with the expectation that due to the complexity of social phenomenon, there are few conditions that are both necessary and sufﬁcient to cause an outcome alone (i.e. are monocausal). One method of operationalizing set-theory is Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) which combines qualitative (casebased) and quantitative (variable-oriented) techniques (Berg-Scholsser and De Meur, 2009). The logical underpinning for QCA is the goal of causal interpretation to understand phenomena, the use of truth tables to represent causal complexity, and employment of the principal of logical minimization to improve interpretability (Schneider and Wagemann, 2010). Crisp-set QCA (csQCA) is a variant of QCA where binary conditions are used to represent cases as sets of high/present (1) and low/absent (0) elements (Rihoux and De Meur, 2009). An alternative to csQCA is fuzzy set QCA, which looks at continuous variables or those that have been grouped in more than two categories. As our approach in this study was to view states as falling into ideal categories, csQCA was more appropriate than fsQCA for the analysis. The ﬁrst step in csQCA is to dichotomize data in the sets to create a data table where each case (row) is represented by the outcome and a set of causal conditions (column) called a truth table (Rihoux and De Meur, 2009). The second step is to exhaustively examine the possible combinations (2k where k is the number of conditions) and then combine the conﬁgurations with their outcomes in order to determine whether the conﬁgurations consistently lead to an outcome, yielding a truth table (Rihoux and De Meur, 2009). The third step is to simplify the truth table through logical reduction (Fiss, 2011; Ragin and Fiss, 2008). The results of this are discussed below.
3

INUS refers to insufﬁcient but non-redundant parts of a condition which is itself unnecessary but sufﬁcient for the occurrence of the effect.

308

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

3.2. Data set We operationalized each of the ecosystem constructs using several different categorical independent variables. This allows us to better see the richness in the analysis and ultimately allows us to create a richer ecosystem. Following the ecological perspective, we identiﬁed several characteristics of the organism (the CIO), the structures and relationships that constrain/support the CIO and the environment that sets the condition for innovation. While all possible variables listed below were considered, several were discarded during a factor analysis to develop consistent factors for subsequent analyses. Much of the data for the ecosystem elements and innovations were taken from the 2004 NASCIO Compendium of Digital Government in the States (hereafter, referred to as the NASCIO Compendium). This roughly annual survey compiled between 1998 and 2005 by the National Association of State CIOs was a compilation of information solicited directly from CIOs on a range of topics from executive IT authority to program implementation. It incorporates approximately 449 separate data elements and is one of the most in-depth and comprehensive data collections on state-level public sector IT ever compiled. The 2004 edition garnered responses from 42 states and represented 86% of the nation’s population, a rate of return generally unachievable in in comparable researcher-initiated questionnaire-based surveys (Sivo et al., 1996), making the industry association collected secondary data sourcing critical to understanding the population of interest. 3.2.1. CIO personal characteristics We used the information from the 2004 NASCIO Compendium, LinkedIn and press releases to identify the CIO’s: (1⁄)4 level of education (high school, bachelor or graduate), (2⁄) age, (3) tenure within the state, (4) tenure in the CIO position, and (5⁄) type of degree (technology-centric, business-centric or other). While we are not asserting these are the only characteristics that can deﬁne the potential advantageous capabilities that a CIO has, they follow the Upper Echelon Theory operationalization of personal characteristics and have been used in prior leadership studies (Hambrick and Mason, 1984). 3.2.2. Structural characteristics We used data from the 2004 Compendium to capture the structural environment within the public sector. As previously discussed, we examined two major elements of structure within state government that we believe function in the role of the mediating hierarch proposed by the legal view of agency theory: the LOC and the IT Steering Committee. We operationalized structural as follows: (1⁄) the CIO’s role on the IT Steering Committee, (2⁄) what branch (executive or legislative) appoints the CIO, (3) the sitting Governor’s political afﬁliation (indicative of the state view on role of government) and (4) the presence/ absence of an IT steering committee at the legislative level. These items had the potential to provide some evidence of the structural dimension of the CIOs job by looking at both the composition of the IT steering committee and the relationship with the state legislature and provide some consistency with legal agency theory. 3.2.3. Relational characteristics This construct is designed to uncover the CIO’s relationship with the dominant ﬁgure for the CIO: the Governor. Applying the Cyert and March (1963) dominant coalition argument to state level government, we suggest that Governor is the dominant ﬁgure (akin to a CEO in the public sector as argued by Dawson et al. (2015)) and we seek to examine the nature of that relationship. We operationalized this construct to include: (1) if the sitting Governor appointed the CIO, (2) level of similarity between the level of education of the Governor and the CIO, (3⁄) level of similarity between the work history/industry of the Governor and the CIO, and (4⁄) if the CIO and Governor are of the same gender. Given that the relationship with the Governor is likely the most important interpersonal relationship, we think that examining the closeness of this relationship is apt. Data on the Governors in 2004 were collected from open source websites including those of the state governments. 3.2.4. Environmental characteristics This construct examines the state environment that surrounds the CIO and included as possible indicators: (1) the percentage of citizens with a bachelor’s degree within the state and (2) the average income within the state. These items provide insight into the socio-economic dimension of the CIO’s innovation work. All of this information is publicly available and was taken from 2004/2005 sources. 3.2.5. Level of innovation The NASCIO Compendium identiﬁes the level of investment (High/Medium/Low/None) in key innovative technologies for government-to-government (G2G) and organizational service areas within each state including investment in .gov initiatives, customer relationship management, digital signatures, e-procurement, knowledge management, virtual private network and state websites. In 2004, these were innovative technologies and states had great disparity in their spending and implementation activity for each innovative technology. As this captures the innovation investments that were made across all 50 states, we treated this as a composite construct indicating the breadth and depth of innovation activity. We are not asserting that each of the technologies were at equal stages of innovation in 2004. Rather we are positing that each technology was in some stage of innovation at that time and differential spending on these technologies serves as a
4

Those attributes that are marked with an ‘‘⁄” were later excluded from the analysis.

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

309

suitable proxy for the level of innovation that is taking place within state government. In a 2009 article on e-government technology spending, Peristeras et al. (2009) noted the ‘‘huge investments” on these initiatives throughout the 2000s. As late as 2007, scholars noted that even in technology sophisticated countries, only a low number of citizens used (25%) used egovernment portals for more than simple information sources. Hence, we assert that these were likely considered to be innovative technologies at the time. In using secondary data, we recognize that we were making a trade-off for the breadth of data elements and depth of population coverage; this trade-off was in our ability to select and fully validate the measures as secondary data may only approximately map onto an ideal research question or construct (Cowton, 1998). While we cannot directly validate the measures as we would in creating our own surveys, we can note that this data set has been used extensively in prior research including at top journals such as Management Science (Pang et al., 2016), Decision Support Systems (Pang, 2014) and Government Information Quarterly (Ni and Ho, 2005). Regarding the mapping on constructs, while there may have been cases where we could have used and alternative formulation of the construct leading to other measures, we insured that there was a solid underlying basis for each secondary data indicator included in the study. An example of the alternative formulations issue can be seen in the CIO personal characteristics construct, for which we chose Upper Echelon Theory (Hambrick and Mason, 1984) that allows for deﬁnition in terms of age, tenure and education, data that was available in the NASCIO Compendium. An alternative formulation could be ground in Mintzberg’s (1973) leadership framework which would have looked more at capabilities and skills as indicators of CIO personal characteristics including strategic business skills (Preston, 2003; Preston et al., 2008; Preston et al., 2006), strategic technology skills (Dawson and Watson, 2006), communications ability (Broadbent and Kitzis, 2004) or change management (Broadbent and Kitzis, 2004). This formulation is equally valid, but could not be substantiated by the available data. Therefore we chose the Hambrick-based tradition and made similar theory-centric judgments for all other constructs. We also acknowledge that our innovation and ecosystem data is from 2004 and that questions may arise about the age of the data and concerns regarding generalizability of results need to be addressed. First, the concept of innovation, much like the concept of leadership, is enduring and historical scholars continue to study prior leaders to glean insights for modern leadership scholarship. We argue that the same concept applies to innovation and examinations into historical innovation can yield insights into innovation today, even if the speciﬁc innovations may be different. We note that we are not studying the individual innovations, which are transitory and timeframe-speciﬁc, but rather the innovativeness of the states, which is enduring and not linked to a particular period. Secondly, we are aware of no other dataset, within any industry for any time period, which contains the full and directly comparable analysis of innovation efforts across all entities within that industry. What our dataset may lack in newness it more than makes up for it in its completeness, making it a valuable resource with which to make a theoretical contribution. Third, while no known studies with the IS domain have looked at differences in innovation approach based on time period, one known study looked at changes in CIO turnover based on time period. While it is not a perfect comparator, it does provide some support for possible constancy in the IS domain. This study (Dawson et al., 2015) compared CIO turnover to turnover for other executives between 1994 and 2009 and broke their data set into three distinct epochs (1994–1994, 2000–2004 and 2005–2009) in an effort to uncover differences in turnover based on time period. In their discussion of coding for epoch start/stop dates, Dawson et al. (2015) found that ‘‘. . .varying the epoch deﬁnitions did not reveal dramatic differences or suggest to us that we could have improved our coding of temporal differences [by using different start/stop dates]” (p. 99). Finally, the ecosystem that surrounds innovation (Governor, CIO and legislature) is largely unchanged since the founding of the states and this suggests some constancy in factors inﬂuencing innovation. While we acknowledge that some speciﬁc differences in individual states may occur between the time the data were collected and the present day, the data themselves do not impact on our formulation of the model or the interpretation of the results emerging from it.

3.2.6. State-level performance This data was from the 2005 Government Performance Project (GPP) at the Pew Charitable Trust. The creation of the GPP is a joint effort of academics, the Pew Charitable Trusts and Governing magazine and is designed to provide resources for indepth news reporting and academic research. In addition to gathering state from public sources (e.g. auditor reports, state web sites, state capital budgets, workforce plans etc.). Pew also interviewed over 1400 individuals for the 2008 report including legislators, ﬁscal analysts, budget ofﬁcers, CIOs, agency representatives and leaders of civic organizations.5 In addition to determining an overall grade for state performance, Pew also provides grades for how effectively the state performs in the areas of Information (reﬂects how well elected leaders and managers use information and technology to measure the effectiveness of services, make decisions, and communicate with citizens), People (How well does the state manage its employees, including implementing an effective and efﬁcient hiring, retention, development and reward system), money (reﬂecting how well the state manages its ﬁscal resources), and Infrastructure (reﬂecting how well the state manage its physical infrastructure). A recent Google Scholar search showed that, since 2001, over 2300 articles, including many in top public policy academic journals, have cited GPP data as a primary data source. Given that the innovation spending took place throughout 2004, we assumed that the innovation would not be sufﬁciently in place to start to produce positive outcomes until 2005. Thus, we compared innovation spending in 2004 with state
5

Details on the number of people interviewed for the 2005 report are not available but are assumed to be similar.

310

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

level performance in 2005 and 2008. This approach captures both the immediate impact (if any) of innovation using the 2005 data and any longer term impact of the innovation using the 2008 data. 4. Results 4.1. Factor analysis The indicators from the four ecosystem constructs provided substantial raw data to understand the CIO’s environment. Using them, we conducted an exploratory factor analysis (EFA) to identify common factors. Over the course of several reduction iterations, seven indicators with signiﬁcant cross-loadings were dropped until four distinct factors with two indicators each emerged in Table 2. As Nunnally (1967) notes, 0.70 is a recommended benchmark for established measures, for an initial development with all loading above 0.80 and no cross-loadings above 0.30, these are very consistent factors. These four factors explained 83.1% of variance in the sample and were both coherent and directly related to our theoretical constructs from the ecological model proposed by Costello (2013). Thus we ﬁnd a great deal of consistency between the ecosystem model derived by in the private sector and our model derived in the public sector. This provides the ability to leverage private sector innovation research and facilitates a comparison between innovation in the private and public sector. 4.2. Relationship of ecosystem factors to innovation We examined the relationship of the ecosystem factors to innovation using a conﬁgurational analysis approach.6 The ﬁrst step in the csQCA was to dichotomize the factors into the truth table at Appendix A. Given the factors were composites of the underlying observed variables, we used the mean to divide high (1) and low (0) observations for each of the four factors. There are 16 possible conﬁgurations based on the 24 combinations of binary factors where each conﬁguration can be represented in its binary form (i.e. 0000–1111). This can lead to four possible arrangements with the outcome variable. The ﬁrst is a set of consistent positive results, where the conﬁguration is linked to the positive outcome. The second is a set of consistent negative results, where the conﬁguration is linked to the negative outcome. The third is a set of contradictory conﬁgurations, where both positive and negative outcomes are observed. The last is a logical remainder, where there are neither positive nor negative outcomes observed. Sufﬁciency refers to when a condition is present across cases, then the outcome must also be present, whereas necessity refers to when the outcome is present, then the condition must also be present. Using the data table at Appendix A, it is possible to test for sufﬁciency and necessity for all individual elements. As illustrated in Table 3, none of the individual elements were necessary or sufﬁcient conditions. Cases appearing in the upper-right off-diagonal refute sufﬁciency as there cannot be cases there, while cases in the lower-left off-diagonal refute necessity. So while the correlational analysis identiﬁes that relational, structural and environmental conditions signiﬁcantly inﬂuence innovation, the conﬁgurational analysis identiﬁes that none of these factors inﬂuence it on their own, but rather only do so only in combination with each other. The csQCA was conducted using fs/QCA 2.5 (Ragin and Davey, 2009). The notation used is adopted from Ragin and Fiss (2008) and Fiss (2011) where black circles ( ( ) indicate the necessary presence of a condition and crossed-out circles ) indicates a core condition and a small circle (d) indi) indicate its necessary absence. Where present, a large circle (

cates a peripheral condition. The absence of a circle indicates that presence or absence of the condition does not impact on the outcome (i.e. the same result occurs whether there condition is present or absent). In presenting conﬁgurations, those that have the same core conditions are assigned the same number, but are differentiated by their peripheral conditions by letters (i.e. 1A and 1B have the same core conditions but different peripheral conditions). Table 4 presents the csQCA results for high and low innovation. For both high and low innovation, coverage and consistency are acceptable which provides support for the ecosystem model approach. Taken together, the results provide support for adopting this viewpoint. First, the core conﬁguration for producing innovation (High Innovation 1A and 1B) is to combine a positive environmental situation (high income/high education level) with relational distance between the Governor and the CIO (low relational). Regarding the environmental condition, this may indicate that the state has the ability to realize the transformative
6 We also tested the relationships between the ecosystem factors to innovation using a correlational approach as a benchmark, ﬁnding that structural and environmental factors were positively related to innovation, relational factors were negatively related and personal factors were not signiﬁcantly related.

Factor F1 F2 F3 F4
a

Innovation 0.214 0.357b À0.341b 0.481a

– – – –

Personal Structural Relational Environmental

b

Correlation signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). Correlation signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318 Table 2 Factor analysis. Indicator CIO Experience in State (P3)a Tenure as CIO (P4) Governor Political Afﬁliation (S3) Legislative Oversight of CIO (S4) Governor Appointed CIO (R1) CIO/Governor Similar Education (R2) Average State Income (E2) Average State Education Level (E1) Component 0.941 0.932 0.087 0.126 À0.124 0.099 0.074 À0.169 0.047 À0.130 0.067 0.063 0.070 0.153 0.938 0.915 0.019 0.020 À0.888 0.880 0.168 0.169 À0.028 0.026

311

0.095 0.142 À0.010 À0.014 À0.821 0.814 À0.097 0.200

a The letter/number within the parenthesis show the source/number of the indicator. Indicators with a ‘‘P” are from the Personal construct, ‘‘S” are from the Structural construct, ‘‘R” are from the Relational construct and ‘‘E” are from the Environmental construct.

Table 3 Tests of sufﬁciency and necessity. Personal 1 Innovation Sufﬁciency Necessity 1 0 11 8 No No 0 10 11 Structural 1 14 6 No No 0 7 13 Relational 1 8 16 No No 0 13 3 Environmental 1 13 6 No No 0 8 13

Table 4 Innovation csQCA results.a Conﬁguration 1A F1 – Personal F2 – Structural F3 – Relational F4 – Environmental Consistencyb Raw coveragec Unique coveraged Overall solution consistencye Overall solution coveragef 0.889 0.381 0.190 0.857 0.286 0.095 0.883 0.714 d d  0.750 0.143 0.143  1.000 0.095 0.095 0.833 0.526 0.368 0.857 0.632 0.833 0.263 0.105 1B  High innovation 2 3 1 Low innovation 2

a We conducted both csQCA and a fsQCA using the same data set. The dominant conﬁgurations were the same, however the csQCA results had both higher coverage and consistency for both the high and low performance outcomes:

b Consistency refers to the percentage of the observations conforming to the conﬁguration. A consistency of 1.000 means that all observed cases of that conﬁguration had the same outcome, yielding a very high degree of conﬁdence in the solution. c Raw coverage reﬂects the total share of the outcome that is explained by a conﬁguration. d Unique coverage reﬂects the unique share of the outcome that is explained by the conﬁguration. e Overall solution consistency reﬂects the extent to which the cases within the dataset correspond to the relationships in the solution (Fiss, 2011). f Overall solution coverage is a measure of ﬁtness for the entire set of conﬁgurations, which makes it analogous to R-squared in regression (Fiss et al. 2013).

capabilities of technology innovation and has the money to enact it. Rather than worrying about providing basic services to the taxpayer, we suspect that this reﬂects a state that, because they are doing well in providing basic services, has the money to be innovative. Interestingly, this core conﬁguration also includes a distant relationship between the CIO and the Governor, speciﬁcally in that the Governor did not appoint the CIO and they are very different in educational backgrounds. This would

312

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

seem to be in contrast to the proximity arguments made to develop shared mental models (Preston, 2003; Preston et al., 2006). We interpret this to mean that while the CIO will support the Governor’s innovation agenda, he or she is not beholden to it and use his/her unique and complementary education and skills to advance innovation. While on the surface this would seem to ﬂy in the face of the strategic alignment literature (Sabherwal et al., 2001), the CIO in this view can be seen as an agent free to serve the true principal, which is the state itself under legal agency theory, and does so with appropriate resources to do so. Thus, there is more consistency with the strategic alignment literature than ﬁrst appears. The two related high innovation conﬁgurations can be differentiated by their peripheral elements. For the dominant conﬁguration (High Innovation 1A), there is a reliance on structural considerations. This aligns with classic agency theory (Eisenhardt, 1989), suggesting that some state governments still use classical agency mechanisms of monitoring and control to ensure appropriate behaviors and that they can be appropriate in a public sector context. This may further support the ﬁnding that the identiﬁcation of PSM and self-interest are orthogonal and hence that even in the presence of high PSM, some control of self-interest may be appropriate (De Dreu, 2006). The second positive conﬁguration (High Innovation 1B) suggests that a transplanted CIO can be successful since, in this conﬁguration, the CIO is short-tenured, both as CIO and state government. This suggests a relatively new agent who has been given the resources to try to be innovative while still under the watchful eyes of the duly appointed agents with ﬁduciary responsibilities – the elected ofﬁcials of the legislative branch. This supports the tradition on tenure that shorter-tenure executives tend to be more experimental and innovative (Hambrick and Mason, 1984). The second major high innovation conﬁguration (High Innovation 2) has high personal (long-serving) and high structural (robust oversight) core conditions with low environmental (reﬂecting a state with low income and low educational achievement) but high relational (closeness to Governor) peripheral conditions. Of note, the CIO is a long-serving agent, supporting the alternate tradition on tenure that very experienced executives with better systems knowledge are more likely to take innovative actions (Simsek, 2007). In this conﬁguration, the state is experiencing low performance and thus the CIO (personal characteristics), the Governor (relational) and the state legislature (structural) come together to try a dramatic effort to improve the performance of the state. We suspect that the full involvement of all parts of the ecosystem is necessary to even attempt innovation but that this combined effort can be often successful (Costello et al., 2013). The lower consistency of this conﬁguration, however, would also suggest that it is not always so. The third major high innovation conﬁguration (High Innovation 3) has as its core conditions independence of the CIO, both from the perspectives of lacking closeness with the Governor (low relational) and lacking oversight from the legislative branch (low structural), with the added peripheral condition of poor state performance (low environmental). As the low coverage would indicate, this is a relatively unusual conﬁguration as it requires either a great deal of trust in the CIO as the agent of the state or desperation, corresponding to the ‘heroic myth’ of lone-leader/innovator that persists in government (Dawson and Denford, 2015). We interpret this conﬁguration as a ‘‘Hail Mary” conﬁguration whereby removing the constraints on oversight, the state hopes to gain an innovation ‘‘savior”.7 While not linked by core conditions in a single solution, the two negative conﬁgurations (Low Innovation 1 and 2) have some similarities and are quite clear: a close relationship between the Governor and CIO and the absence of the structural dimension are unambiguously associated with low innovation. This would suggest that while the relationship between Governor and CIO is still a strategic partnership (Gupta, 1991), the degree of personal relationship (Peppard, 2010) can be too deep. Cronyism is favoritism based on relationship and loyalty and is comprised of particularism - a strong in-group bias - and paternalism - unreserved personal loyalty; cronyism has been hypothesized to decrease organizational commitment (Khatri and Tsang, 2003). We apply cronyism in the context that if the CIO is seen as close to the Governor, innovation efforts may be a ‘‘pet project” of the Governor carried out by a captive CIO for the Governor’s beneﬁt rather than something for the overall good of the state and hence may be resisted by the other mediating hierarchs in the innovation ecosystem. We suspect that if the CIO is seen as not beholden to the Governor, the innovation is more likely to be evaluated based on its merits rather than as the Governor’s pet project. Given that this theme is strongly echoed in the positive conﬁgurations, we think that this point is clear. Returning to the legal view of agency theory, the Governor assumes the role of principal rather than agent to the state, and appoints an agent that would support his or her role as principal rather than the state. Similarly, the lack of legislative control sees an abrogation of the ﬁduciary responsibilities incumbent on elected ofﬁcials. As views by legal agency, both of these should, and do, lead to weaker performance outcomes. The differentiators between the conﬁgurations for low innovation are found in the other two conﬁguration elements. For the dominant conﬁguration (Low Innovation 1) this is the environmental factor and we suspect that in resource-constrained states the funding is not available to support signiﬁcant innovation efforts at the expense of basic taxpayer services. The development of innovative IS capabilities and competences within the state can be seen to be hampered by this lack of investment in IS resources (Peppard and Ward, 2004). For the second conﬁguration (Low Innovation 2) this is the personal factor, where a longer serving state CIO is linked to lower innovation, supporting the ‘stale in the saddle’ view where executives’ strategic decisions increasing mismatch environmental realities over time (Miller, 1991). We suspect that these longer-serving CIOs have a set repertoire of actions and may not be seen as change agents but rather simply as tactical managers who are better at operations than innovation.

7 In American football, a ‘‘Hail Mary” is a very long forward pass with little probability of success but is done when other conventional options are unlikely to work. Its usage dates back to the 1930s and suggests that divine intervention is necessary for the team to complete the pass.

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318 Table 5 Correlations between performance and innovation. Performance outcome Overall state performance Money grade People grade Infrastructure grade Information grade
a b

313

2005 0.514a 0.321b 0.298 0.315b 0.490a

2008 0.412a 0.183 0.486a 0.041 0.307

Correlation signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). Correlation signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

In summary, we ﬁnd that there are a variety of conﬁgurations that support both high and low innovation within states based upon unique combinations of personal, relational, structural and environmental factors, thus supporting both P1A and P1B and that these conﬁgurations are consistent with the legal view of agency theory. 4.3. Relation of innovations to outcomes We next tested the relationship between innovation (in 2004) and state-level performance in 2005 and 2008 (see Table 5). Innovation in 2004 has a strong correlation with overall state-level performance in 2005 and 2008 but the dimensions of performance that are affected differ substantially. In 2005, the dimensions of money, infrastructure and information are affected but the dimension of people is not while in 2008, only the dimension of people is affected. It is helpful to examine the items that make up each dimension to aid in interpretation. The information dimension reﬂects how well the state is using information to make decisions, money reﬂects how well the state manages its ﬁnances, infrastructure refers to how well the state manages its physical infrastructure while people refers to how well the state manages its employees (using the effective hiring, retention and development). We suspect that, in 2005, the state can quickly act to employ the innovation on its information, money and infrastructure dimensions since those are all dimensions that are less encumbered by onerous regulations that surround how the state deals with its employees (people dimension), which are generally constrained by civil service regulations and public sector union contracts. As a result of these regulations and contracts, the state is simply not able to change its personnel processes without a lengthy (and likely expensive) effort. Prior research comparing the private and public sector have highlighted managing personnel as a key difference between the public and the private sector (Bozeman and Rainey, 1998; Rainey and Bozeman, 2000) and we suspect that this accounts for the lag in realizing the beneﬁts of innovation in 2005. By contrast, only the people dimension is affected by innovation in 2008 and we also attribute this lag to the civil service regulations that surround personnel management in the public sector. We posit that the regulations delay the people beneﬁt until 2008 while the other dimensions are more immediately affected. We posit the following rationale for the relatively short-lived performance bump for the innovations. Within the public sector, there is not competition between states as each has a monopoly of service provision within their geographic area, therefore best practice within in a state is often trumpeted through organizations such as NASCIO rather than protected in competitive industries. Additionally, ‘‘sunshine laws” require that a state operates with high transparency and thus all actions that the state takes are relatively easy to discern for other states. While the states are not in competition with each other, the relative transparency of state operations should allow other states to quickly see which innovations are successful and then emulate them. In this way, an innovation quickly becomes a standard operating procedure within the states and thus no longer serves as a differentiator but simply an expectation and we suspect that this dulls the value of the innovation over the long term. As such, we ﬁnd that higher innovation is related to higher state performance, supporting P2, but caveat this ﬁnding by noting that different categories of performance may be impacted at different times and that impacts may be ﬂeeting. 5. Limitations, contributions, implications and conclusion As with all research studies, the current study has certain limitations. First, we note that the data was collected from secondary sources. While there is every reason to accept that the data within the data set is accurate, we note that the data limits our ability to conceptual constructs outside of what it reports. Second, we do not assert that the variables highlighted in this analysis are the only elements that lead to innovation. Other elements could potentially exist but were outside of the scope of our study. Third, we acknowledge that we did not test every variable that could be apt for operationalization of our constructs, as our goal was to provide validation for the ecological view and not to exhaustively test every possible operationalization. Fourth, this study only looked a composite factor of innovation and we suggest that much greater and more detailed examination into innovation, its predictors and its outcome may yield additional insights. Finally, we acknowledge that our dataset is from 2004/2005 and some differences in innovation may occur since that time period. However, the intent of this study was to examine innovation as a process, not necessarily examine the impacts of speciﬁc current-day innovations. Those innovative practices and projects captured were state-of-the-art at the time of data collection and it is the governance of innovations that is the subject of this study, rather than the investigation of the innovations themselves.

314

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

This research makes several contributions. First, we have uncovered an important relationship between actors, structures and environments that links IT governance decisions with performance. While previous research has demonstrated how organizational value can be created from IT governance through strategic alignment (De Haes and Van Grembergen, 2009; Wu et al., 2015) or through building IT capabilities (Prasad et al., 2010), we have made the linkage through innovation as an outcome of good IT governance and as an important strategic contributor to organizational success. Second, our research shows the interesting mix of similarities and differences between public and private sector research on innovation. While the factors creating innovation are the same between the two sectors (dimensions of personal characteristics, structural, relational and environmental), the relevance of each dimension within the two domains is surprisingly different, particularly in the area of relational. A host of IS literature would seem to support the need for a close relationship between the CIO and CEO within the public sector (Preston, 2003; Preston et al., 2008; Preston and Karahanna, 2009; Preston et al., 2006) but our results seem to show a much different dynamic in which distance is preferable to closeness. Thus, while the ecosystem model holds, it is signiﬁcantly different and this is a challenge for future researchers. Third, thanks to the use of a conﬁgurational analysis, we are able to uncover several models of innovation and this supports the idea that different paths can lead to the same outcome. This approach makes several contributions. The comparison of results from correlational and conﬁgurational analysis highlights the complementary nature of the approaches. Focusing on the correlational analysis alone would have led us to disregard the personal characteristics of the CIO as an important factor, whereas it is, in combination with the other conditions, critical to our understanding of the phenomenon of interest. The ﬁndings of different high and low conﬁgurational results also show how additional insight can be gleaned by not assuming a linear relationship between causal condition and outcome. Additionally, our results show that the conﬁguration results support that there is not a single pathway to innovation. Rather, multiple pathways exist and no single condition was present in all of the high-performing conﬁgurations. Fourth, we ﬁnd that either a long serving public sector or short serving private sector CIO can be effective but what is most striking is that both require involvement from multiple players within the ecosystem in order to create innovation. While conceptually this aligns with Costello et al.’s work on innovation ecosystems (2013), it is a striking change from the idea of leaders becoming stale if their tenure is too long, which would belie the value of the long-serving public servant (Miller, 1991). This would indicate that senior government ofﬁcial need to understand the linkages between the various parts of the innovation ecosystem and select a CIO who is best positioned to contribute to its success, albeit one who is brought in from the private sector or one who has been developed within the public service. Stressing the ecosystem view and counter to the heroic myth of a solitary leader forcing change, we can conﬁdently say that most pathways to innovation require a group effort. Fifth, we ﬁnd support for the use of the legal view of agency theory, particularly in the role of a mediating hierarch for the legislature and the Governor. With these actors sitting in this position, they are able to mediate the demands of the different stakeholders and give a clear and consistent direction to the CIO. Thus, their involvement produces positive outcomes as predicted by the theory. Additionally, we identiﬁed that when agents support the true principal – the state – the performance rewards are signiﬁcant; conversely, if the Governor situates him or herself as the principal with a captive CIO, we found evidence of lower innovation performance. This greatly extends the concept of the mediating hierarch as proposed under legal agency theory (Lan and Heracleous, 2010). Finally, it suggests that innovation, due to its short-lived improvement in performance, needs to be a continuous process rather than a one-time event. In this way, our research supports the recent work on CIO-enabled innovation in the federal government space, which emphasizes the ongoing nature of innovation (Dawson and Denford, 2015). These results have important implications for both theory and practice. For theory, this demonstrates what Peppard (2010) noted regarding anecdotal evidence of non-transferability of CIO success – the ecological model and causal complexity inherent in our analysis methods bear that it may be more than just the CIO’s personal characteristics that is important. This is a contribution. For practice, this leads to issues of CIO sourcing and succession planning. If structural, relational and environmental characteristics are important, then CIOs should be selected to match the ecosystem’s needs; this could involve either further developing the capability of an existing senior IT leader or going external to ﬁnd a private sector innovator, depending on circumstances. These ﬁndings also suggest several future research topics. First, this study took place at the state level with the U.S. It is unclear what different results may occur at a different level of government or outside of the U.S. Given the applicability of PSM cross nationally, we suspect that our ﬁndings may be generalizable and leave this topic for future researchers. Second, it is unclear how the high/low alignment between the CIO and Governor may impact the results and suggest that it is a fruitful area for future research. Third, while we believe that the nature of the relationship between the Governor and the CIO would be impactful, we leave this topic for future researchers.8 Four, we acknowledge that the use of secondary data always raises construct-related issues and suggest a fruitful avenue for future researchers would be to further examine the constructs that are used in this study. Undertaking such a study is likely to not only validate the constructs used in this study but could potentially uncover numerous other salient conceptualizations of constructs. This would allow researchers to more fully vet our ﬁndings as well as generalize them to other domains. This research could focus on innovation, governance, the role of elected ofﬁcials (Governor and legislature) or on the role of the CIO. Each is potentially a very rich research area. In conclusion, IT spending

8

One of our anonymous reviewer suggested this as a topic for future research.

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

315

in the public sector is already massive and is expected to continue to grow robustly in the future. Further, as stafﬁng drops for all levels of government, the demands on IT will continue to grow, the investments will continue to grow and the expectations will continue to grow. Further, approximately 49.2% of Americans (151 m) receive direct ﬁnancial support from the government and, to these Americans, government actions may mean the difference between life and death. It is no longer acceptable to simply view government as a poorly performing cousin of the private sector and it is time to invigorate the study of IT-based innovation in the public sector. The sheer size, scope and criticality of government demand it. Appendix A. csQCA data set

State AR AZ CT FL GA HI IA ID KS KY LA MD ME MI MN MO MS MT NC ND NH NJ NM NV NY OH OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VA VT WA WI WV WY

Innovation 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 0

F1 Personal 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0

F2 Relational 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0

F3 Structural 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1

F4 Environmental 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0

316

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

Appendix B. csQCA truth table

F1 Personal 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1

F2 Relational 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1

F3 Structural 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0

F4 Environmental 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 0

Number 8 5 4 4 4 4 3 2 2 2 1 1 0 0 0 0

Innovation 0 1 1 0 1 C C 1 C 0 1 1 R R R R

Raw/PRI Consistency 0.125 0.8 1 0.25 0.75 0.5 0.333333 1 0.5 0 1 1

References
Albanese, R., Dacid, M.T., Harris, I.C., Davis, J.H., Schoorman, F.D., Donaldson, L., 1997. Dialogue. Acad. Manage. Rev. 22 (3), 609–613. Alchian, A., Demsetz, H., 1972. Production, information costs, and economic organization. Am. Econ. Rev. 62 (5), 777–795. Andrew, R., Beynon, M.J., McDermott, A.M., 2016. Organizational capacity in the public sector: a conﬁgurational approach. J. Public Admin. Res. Theory 26 (2), 239–258. Armstrong, C.P., Sambamurthy, V., 1999. Information technology assimilation in ﬁrms: the inﬂuence of senior leadership and IT infrastructures. Inform. Syst. Res. 10 (4), 304–328. Arthurs, J.D., Busenitz, L.W., 2003. The boundaries and limitations of agency theory and stewardship theory in the venture capitalist/entrepreneur relationship. Entrep. Theory Pract. 28 (2), 145–162. Avital, M., Mathiassen, L., Crowston, K., El-Sawy, O., Gregor, S., 2012. Alternative genres of IS research: looking for great leaps forward. Proc. Int. Conf. Inform. Syst. 2012, 1305–1310. Beath, C.M., 1991. Supporting the information technology champion. MIS Q. 15 (3), 355–372. Berg-Scholsser, D., De Meur, G., 2009. Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) as an approach. In: Rihoux, B., Ragin, C.C. (Eds.), Conﬁgurational Comparative Methods: Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) and Related Techniques. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 1–18. Besson, P., Rowe, F., 2012. Strategizing information systems-enabled organizational transformation: a transdisciplinary review and new directions. J. Strategic Inform. Syst. 21 (2), 103–124. Blair, M., Stout, L., 2001. Corporate accountability: director accountability and the mediating role of the corporate board. Washington Law Rev. 79, 403–447. Bowen, P.L., Cheung, M.-Y.D., Rohde, F.H., 2007. Enhancing IT governance practices: a model and case study of an organization’s efforts. Int. J. Account. Inform. Syst. 8 (3), 191–221. Box, R.C., 1999. Running government like a business implications for public administration theory and practice. Am. Rev. Public Admin. 29 (1), 19–43. Bozeman, B., 1993. A theory of government red tape. J. Public Admin. Res. Theory 3 (3), 273–303. Bozeman, B., Bretschneider, S., 1986. Public management information systems: theory and prescription. Public Admin. Rev. 46 (6), 475–487. Bozeman, B., Rainey, H.G., 1998. Organizational rules and bureaucratic personality. Am. J. Political Sci. 50 (5), 536–545. Bradley, R.V., Byrd, T.A., Pridmore, J.L., Thrasher, E., Pratt, R.M.E., Mbarika, V.W.A., 2012. An empirical examination of antecedents and consequences of IT governance in US hospitals. J. Inform. Technol. 27 (2), 156–177. Broadbent, M., Kitzis, E., 2004. The New CIO Leader: Setting the Agenda and Delivering Results. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA. Brown, V., Paulus, P.B., 1996. A simple dynamic model of social factors in group brainstorming. Small Group Res. 27 (1), 91–114. Campbell, J.L., McDonald, C.J., Sethibe, T., 2010. Public and private sector IT governance: identifying contextual differences. Aust. J. Inform. Syst. 16 (2), 1–18. Caudle, S.L., Gorr, W.L., Newcomer, K.E., 1991. Key information systems management issues for the public sector. MIS Q. 15 (2), 171–189. Chesbrough, H.W., 2013. Open Business Models: How to Thrive in the New Innovation Landscape. HB Press. Chopra, A., 2014. Innovative State: How New Technologies Can Transform Government. Atlantic Monthly Press. Chun, M., Mooney, J., 2009. CIO roles and responsibilities: twenty-ﬁve years of evolution and change. Inform. Manage. 46 (6), 323–334. Costello, G.J., Donnellan, B., Curley, M., 2013. A theoretical framework to develop a research agenda for information systems innovation. Commun. Assoc. Inform. Syst. 33 (26), 443–462. Cowton, C.J., 1998. The use of secondary data in business ethics research. J. Bus. Ethics 17 (4), 423–434. Cyert, R., March, J., 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. d’Ydewalle, G., 2006. Sensation/perception, information processing, attention. In: Pawlik, K., Rosenzweig, M.R. (Eds.), International Handbook of Psychology. SAGE, London, England. Damanpour, F., Schneider, M., 2008. Characteristics of innovation and innovation adoption in public organizations: assessing the role of managers. J. Public Admin. Res. Theory 19 (3), 495–522. Davis, J.H., Schoorman, F.D., Donaldson, L., 1997. Toward a stewardship theory of management. Acad. Manage. Rev. 22 (1), 20–47. Dawson, G.S., Denford, J.S., 2015. A Playbook for CIO-Enabled Innovation in the Federal Government. IBM Center for the Business of Government, Washington, DC. Dawson, G.S., Kauffman, R., 2010. Are CIOs any different? Analyzing the job tenures of C-suite executives in the public sector. In: Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Kauai, Hawaii.

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

317

Dawson, G.S., Kauffman, R., 2011. CIO survival and the composition of the top management team. In: International Conference on Information Systems. Milan, Italy. Dawson, G.S., Kauffman, R., Ho, M.W., 2015. How are C-suite executives different? A comparative empirical study of the survival of american chief information ofﬁcers. Decis. Support Syst. 74, 88–101. Dawson, G., Watson, R.T., 2006. All effective CIOs are strategic, right? Disagreement in deﬁning public sector CIO effectiveness. In: Proceedings of the Academy of Management Annual Meeting, Atlanta, GA. Dawson, G.S., Watson, R.T., 2011. Uncovering and testing archetypes of effective public sector CIOs. ACM Trans. Manage. Inform. Syst. 1 (2), 1–19. De Dreu, C.K.W., 2006. Rational self-interest and other orientation in organizational behavior: a critical appraisal and extension of Meglino and Korsgaard (2004). J. Appl. Psychol. 91 (6), 1245–1252. De Haes, S., Van Grembergen, W., 2009. An exploratory study into IT governance implementations and its impact on business/IT alignment. Inform. Syst. Manage. 26 (2), 123–137. Desouza, K.C., 2014. Realizing the Promise of Big Data. IBM Center for the Business of Government, Washington, DC. Desouza, K.C., Bhagwatwar, A., 2012. Leverage technologies in public agencies: the case of the U.S. census bureau and the 2010 census. Public Admin. Rev. 72 (4), 605–614. Desouza, K.C., Bhagwatwar, A., 2014. Technology-enabled participatory platforms for civic engagement: the case of US cities. J. Urban Technol. 21 (4), 25–50. Desouza, K.C., Dawson, G.S., 2015. Ideas to Retire. Brookings Institution, Washington, DC. Dixon, C., 2014. Deltek: State, Local Government IT Spending Increase is an Opportunity for Contractors. Washington Post, Washington, DC. Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Agency theory: an assessment and review. Acad. Manage. Rev. 14 (1), 57–74. Fiss, P.C., 2007. A set-theoretic approach to organizational conﬁgurations. Acad. Manage. Rev. 32 (4), 1180–1198. Fiss, P.C., 2011. Building better causal theories: a fuzzy set approach to typologies in organizational research. Acad. Manage. J. 54 (2), 393–420. Forbes, M., Lynn, L.E., 2005. How does public management affect government performance: ﬁndings from international research. J. Public Res. Theory 15 (4), 559–584. Goldﬁnch, S., 2007. Pessimism, computer failure, and information systems development in the public sector. Public Admin. Rev. 67 (5), 917–929. Goles, T., Hawk, S., Kaiser, K.M., 2008. Information technology workforce skills: the software and IT services provider perspective. Inform. Syst. Front. 10 (2), 179–194. Grant, A.M., 2008. Relational job design and the motivation to make a prosocial difference. Acad. Manage. Rev. 32 (2), 393–417. Gupta, Y.P., 1991. The chief executive ofﬁcer and the chief information ofﬁcer: the strategic partnership. J. Inform. Technol. 6 (3/4), 128–140. Hambrick, D.C., Mason, P.A., 1984. Upper echelons: the organization as a reﬂection of its top managers. Acad. Manage. Rev. 9 (2), 193–206. Hillman, A.J., Cannella Jr., A., Paetzold, R.L., 2000. The resource dependence role of corporate directors: strategic adaption of board composition in response to environmental change. J. Manage. Stud. 37 (2), 235–255. Hillman, A.J., Dalziel, T., 2003. Boards of directors and ﬁrm perfomrnace: integrating agency and resource dependency perspectives. Acad. Manage. Rev. 28 (3), 383–396. Hitt, M.A., Tyler, B.B., 1991. Strategic decision models: integrating different perspectives. Strateg. Manage. J. 12 (5), 327–351. Huang, R., Zmud, R.W., Price, R.L., 2010. Inﬂuencing the effectiveness of IT governance practices through steering committees and communication policies. Eur. J. Inform. Syst. 19 (3), 288–302. Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W.H., 1976. Theory of the ﬁrm: managerial behaviour, agency costs and ownership structure. J. Financ. Econ. 3 (4), 305–360. Kelman, S., 1987. Public choice and public spirit. Public Interest 87 (80), 93–94. Khatri, N., Tsang, E.W.K., 2003. Antecedents and consequences of cronyism in organizations. J. Bus. Ethics 43 (4), 289–303. Lan, L.L., Heracleous, L., 2010. Rethinking agency theory: the view from law. Acad. Manage. Rev. 35 (2), 294–314. Lazonick, W., 2005. The innovative ﬁrm. In: Mowery, J.D., Nelson, R.R. (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Innovation. Oxford University Press, Oxford, England. Leidner, D.E., Preston, D., Chen, D., 2010. An examination of the antecedents and consequences of organizational IT innovation in hospitals. J. Strategic Inform. Syst. 19 (3), 154–170. Li, J., Tan, Y.L., Cai, Z.Y., Zhu, H., Wang, X.R., 2013. Regional differences in a national culture and their effects on leadership effectiveness: a tale of two neighboring chinese cities. J. World Bus. 48 (1), 13–19. Liu, S., Hwang, J., 2003. Challenges to transforming within the US government. IT Prof. 5 (3), 10–15. Melville, N., Kraemer, K., Gurbaxani, V., 2004. Review: information technology and organizational performance: an integrative model of IT business value. MIS Q. 28 (2), 283–322. Mergel, I., Desouza, K.C., 2013. Implementing open innovation in the public sector: the case of challenge. Public Admin. Rev. 73 (6), 882–890. Meyer, A., Tsui, A.S., Hinings, C.R., 1993. Conﬁgurational approaches to organizational analyses. Acad. Manage. J. 36 (6), 1175–1195. Miller, D., 1991. Stale in the saddle: CEO tenure and the match between organization and environment. Manage. Sci. 37 (1), 34–52. Mintzberg, H., 1973. The Nature of Managerial Work. Harper & Row, New York, NY. Musteen, M., Barker, V.L., Baeten, V.L., 2006. CEO attributes associated with attitude toward change: the direct and moderating effects of CEO tenure. J. Bus. Res. 59 (5), 604–612. Nambisan, S., Lyytinen, K., Majchrzak, A., Song, M., 2014. Information technology and innovation-call for papers. MIS Q. Ni, A.Y., Ho, A.T.K., 2005. Challenges in e-government development: lessons from two information kiosk projects. Gov. Inform. Q. 22 (1), 58–74. Nunnally, J., 1967. Psychometric Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York. O’Malley, M., 2014. Doing what works: governing in the age of big data. Public Admin. Rev. 74 (5), 555–556. Pang, M.-S., 2014. IT governance and business value in the public sector operations - the role of elected representatives in IT governance and its impact on IT value in U.S. state governments. Decis. Support Syst. 59 (1), 274–285. Pang, M.-S., Tafti, A., Krishnan, M.S., 2016. Do CIO IT budgets explain bigger or smaller governments? Theory and evidence from U.S. state governments. Manage. Sci. 62 (4), 1020–1041. Peppard, J., 2010. Unlocking the performance of the Chief Information Ofﬁcer (CIO). Calif. Manage. Rev. 52 (4), 73–99. Peppard, J., Ward, J., 2004. Beyond strategic information systems: towards an IS capability. J. Strategic Inform. Syst. 13 (2), 167–194. Peristeras, V., Mentzas, G., Tarabanis, K., Abecker, A., 2009. Transforming E-government and E-participation through IT. Intell. Syst. IEEE 24 (5), 14–19. Perry, J.L., 1996. Measuring public service motivation: an assessment of construct reliability and validity. J. Public Admin. Res. Theory 6 (1), 5–22. Perry, J.L., Wise, L.R., 1990. The motivational bases of public service. Public Admin. Rev. 50 (3), 367–373. Prasad, A., Heales, J., Green, P., 2010. A capabilities-based approach to obtaining a deeper understanding of information technology governance effectiveness: evidence from IT steering committees. Int. J. Account. Inform. Syst. 11 (3), 214–232. Preston, D., 2003. Shared mental models between the CIO and CEO: towards information systems strategic alignment. In: AMCIS 2003 Proceedings, p. p. 452. Preston, D.S., Chen, D., Leidner, D., 2008. Examining the antecedents and consequences of CIO strategic decision-making authority. Decis. Sci. 39 (4), 605– 642. Preston, D.S., Karahanna, E., 2009. Antecedents of is strategic alignment: a nomological network. Inform. Syst. Res. 20 (2), 159–179. Preston, D.S., Karahanna, E., Rowe, F., 2006. Development of shared understanding between the chief information ofﬁcer and top management team in U.S. and french organizations: a cross-cultural comparison. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. 53 (2), 191–206. Purao, S., Desouza, K.C., Becker, J., 2012. Investiging failures in large-scale public sector projects with sentiment analysis. e-Service J. 8 (2), 85–105. Ragin, C.C., 1987. The Comparative Method: Moving Beyond Qualitative and Quantitative Methods. University of California, Berkeley: Berkeley. Ragin, C.C., 2000. Fuzzy-Set Social Science. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. Ragin, C.C., Davey, S., 2009. Fs/QCA. University of California, Irvine, CA.

318

G.S. Dawson et al. / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 299–318

Ragin, C.C., Fiss, P.C., 2008. Net effects analysis versus conﬁgurational analysis: an empirical demonstration. In: Ragin, C.C. (Ed.), Redesigning Social Inquiry: Fuzzy Sets and Beyond. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 190–212. Ragin, C.C., Rihoux, B., 2004. Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA): state of the art and prospects. Qualitative Methods: Newsletter Am. Polit. Sci. Assoc. Org. Section Qual. Methods 2 (2), 3–13. Rainey, H.G., Bozeman, B., 2000. Comparing public and private organizations: empirical research and the power of the a priori. J. Public Admin. Res. Theory 10 (2), 447–470. Rave, D.T., 2013. Politicians as ﬁduciaries. Harvard Law Rev. 126 (3), 671–739. Reich, B.H., Benbasat, I., 2000. Factors that inﬂuence the social dimension of alignment between business and IT objectives. MIS Q. 24 (1), 81–113. Rihoux, B., De Meur, G., 2009. Crisp-Set Qualitative Comparative Analyses (Csqca). In: Rihous, B., Ragin, C.C. (Eds.), Conﬁgurational Comparative Methods: Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) and Related Techniques. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 33–68. Ross, J.W., Feeny, D.F., 2000. The evolving role of the CIO. In: Cincinnati, O.H. (Ed.), Framing the Domains of IT Management: Projecting the Future throyugh the Past. Pinn Flex, Cincinnati, OH, pp. 385–402. Sabherwal, R., Hirschheim, R., Goles, T., 2001. The dynamics of alignment: insights from a punctuated equilibrium model. Organ. Sci. 12 (2), 179–197. Schneider, C.Q., Wagemann, C., 2010. Standards of good practice in Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) and fuzzy-sets. Comp. Sociol. 9 (1), 1–22. Sepulvado, J., 2014. Iowa Will Launch New Cloud-Based Unemployment App This Summer. Government Technology, 6 June 2014 <http:// www.govtech.com/computing/Iowa-Department-of-Workforce-Development-to-Launch-New-Unemployment-App-this-Summer.html> (Last accessed 12 July 2016). Shapiro, S.P., 2005. Agency theory. Ann. Rev. Sociol. 31, 264–284. Simsek, Z., 2007. CEO tenure and organizational performance: an intervening model. Strateg. Manage. J. 28 (6), 653–662. Sivo, S.A., Saunders, C., Chang, Q., Jiang, J.J., 1996. How low should you go? Low response rates and the validity of inference in is questionnair research. J. Assoc. Inform. Syst. 7 (6), 17. Slappendale, C., 1996. Perspectives on innovation in organizations. Organ. Stud. 17 (1), 107–129. Smaltz, D.H., Sambamurthy, V., Agarwal, R., 2006. The antecedents of CIO role effectiveness in organizations: an empirical study in the healthcare sector. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. 53 (2), 297-222. Swanson, E.B., 1994. Information systems innovations among organizations. Manage. Sci. 40 (9), 1069–1092. Sweden, E., 2014. Effective Cross-Jurisdictional Collaboration: Governance Is Critical. National Association of State Chief Information Ofﬁcers, p. p. 8. von Bertalanffy, L., 1968. General System Theory. George Brazillet, New York. Watts, S., Henderson, J.C., 2006. Innovative IT climates: CIO perspectives. J. Strategic Inform. Syst. 15 (2), 125–151. Williamson, A., Fung, A., 2004. Where are we and where can we go? Natl. Civic Rev. 93 (4), 3–15. Williamson, O.E., 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Relational Contracting. Free Press; Collier Macmillan, New York, London. Williamson, O.E., 1993. Opportunism and u. Manage. Decis. Econ. 14 (2), 97–107. Wood, C., 2014. Massachusetts CIO Bill Oates Carries Innovation Culture to the Commonwealth. Government Technology. Wu, S.P.-J., Straub, D.W., Liang, T., 2015. How information technology governance mechanisms and strategic alignment inﬂuence organizational performance: insights from a matched survey of business and IT managers. MIS Q. 39 (2), 497-A7. Wright, B.E., 2001. Public-sector work motivation: a review of the current literature and a revised conceptual model. J. Public Admin. Res. Theory 11 (4), 559–586.

