Journal of Management Information Systems

ISSN: 0742-1222 (Print) 1557-928X (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/mmis20

An Examination of Effective IT Governance in the Public Sector Using the Legal View of Agency Theory
Gregory S. Dawson, James S. Denford, Clay K. Williams, David Preston & Kevin C. Desouza
To cite this article: Gregory S. Dawson, James S. Denford, Clay K. Williams, David Preston & Kevin C. Desouza (2016) An Examination of Effective IT Governance in the Public Sector Using the Legal View of Agency Theory, Journal of Management Information Systems, 33:4, 1180-1208, DOI: 10.1080/07421222.2016.1267533 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2016.1267533

View supplementary material

Published online: 10 Feb 2017.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 11

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=mmis20 Download by: [Bibliotheek TU Delft] Date: 14 February 2017, At: 09:25

An Examination of Effective IT Governance in the Public Sector Using the Legal View of Agency Theory
GREGORY S. DAWSON, JAMES S. DENFORD, CLAY K. WILLIAMS, DAVID PRESTON, AND KEVIN C. DESOUZA
GREGORY S. DAWSON (GregorySDawson@gmail.com; corresponding author) is a clinical associate professor in the School of Accountancy at the W.P. Carey School of Business and a research fellow at the Center for Organization Research and Design at the College of Public Service & Community Solutions, both at Arizona State University. He holds a Ph.D. in information systems from the Terry College of Business at the University of Georgia. Previously, he was a partner in the Government Consulting Practice at PricewaterhouseCoopers. He was also a director at Gartner, working in the state and local government practice. His research has been published in Organization Science, Journal of the AIS, Decision Sciences, Communications of the ACM, and others. He has also written widely for the practitioner press in venues such as the Brookings Institution and InformationWeek. JAMES S. DENFORD (jim.denford@rmc.ca) is an associate professor of management information systems and interim dean of Arts at the Royal Military College of Canada (RMC). He holds a Ph.D. from Queen’s University. Prior to joining academe, he spent 24 years as an army officer in the Royal Canadian Corps of Signals, developing and leading two defense research labs. His research interests focus on knowledge and information systems strategy, leadership, governance, and innovation. His work has been published or is forthcoming in Journal of Strategic Information Systems, Journal of Information Systems, Journal of Information and Knowledge Management, Journal of Knowledge Management, and others. He serves as an associate editor of Information and Management. CLAY K. WILLIAMS (cwillaa@siue.edu) is an associate professor in the Department of Computer Management and Information Systems in the School of Business at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. He holds a Ph.D. in management information systems from the University of Georgia. His research deals with applying the critical realism research paradigm in information systems (IS) research, the processes of coordinating and IS governance, and the creation and ongoing use of IS. He has over 18 years of professional experience in consulting and project management. His work has appeared in MIS Quarterly, Journal of Organizational Computing and

Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/mmis
Journal of Management Information Systems / 2016, Vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 1180–1208. Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC ISSN 0742–1222 (print) / ISSN 1557–928X (online) DOI: 10.1080/07421222.2016.1267533

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1181

Electronic Commerce, Journal of Organizational and End User Computing, and Government Information Quarterly. He serves as a senior editor for DATA BASE. DAVID PRESTON (d.preston@tcu.edu) is a professor of information systems at Texas Christian University. He received his Ph.D. in business administration from the University of Georgia. His research interests include the role/impact of executive IS/business management with regard to organizational IS, IS strategic alignment, and the intersection of analytics and supply chain management. His work has been published or is forthcoming in a variety of journals, including Information Systems Research, Journal of Management Information Systems, MIS Quarterly, Journal of Operations Management, Decision Sciences, and others. He serves as an associate editor for MIS Quarterly. KEVIN C. DESOUZA (kev.desouza@gmail.com) is a Foundation Professor in the School of Public Affairs at Arizona State University. He is also a nonresident senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Illinois at Chicago. He has published more than 100 articles in Public Administration Review, Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, Stanford Social Innovation Review, Communications of the ACM, and others. His work has been featured in Wired, Financial Times, Forbes, Sloan Management Review, BusinessWeek, National Public Radio, and the Wall Street Journal, among others. ABSTRACT: In the private sector, research on information technology (IT) governance has frequently applied the classical view of agency theory and focused on the controlling role played by the board of directors in constraining a potentially opportunistic manager/agent. However, in the public sector, the board of directors does not exist and there may be less need to focus on the controlling aspect of governance and more need to focus on the politically challenging distribution of state resources. In this U.S.-state–based study, we adopt, apply, and extend the legal view of agency theory past its sole focus on the board of directors as the solitary mediating hierarch in order to examine the strategic mediating hierarch role played by the state legislature and then conceptualize and test for the existence of a tactical mediating hierarch played by the IT steering committee and the production role of an independent Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) in using a fee-forservice funding model. We apply these concepts to extend theory to examine the combination of roles that lead to superior outcomes for the state (the principal) versus those necessary for the IT department (the agent). Our results show that by shifting from the control-oriented view of governance in the private sector to a more mediating view in the public sector, important practices may be portable between the public and private sector, despite their widely differing structures. KEY WORDS AND PHRASES: agency theory, CIO, IT governance, IT in public sector, public sector, steering committee.

A firm’s choice of governance structures has long been of interest to organizational scholars since it represents a key managerial strategic decision that can potentially have profound ramifications for firm performance [39]. Information technology (IT)

1182

DAWSON ET AL.

governance refers to “the organizational capacity exercised by the board [of directors], executive management and IT management to control the formulation and implementation of IT strategy and in this way ensure the fusion of business and IT” [56, p. 1128]. Private sector firms with effective information technology (IT) governance, a key component of firm governance, have been observed to generate up to a 40 percent greater return on IT investments than firms that lack such governance [58, 59]. The IT Governance Institute (ITGI) has voiced the need for both board and executive management involvement as essential to the achievement of alignment, and further asserts that through the involvement of all levels of leadership, the IT organization can better execute the organization’s strategies and objectives [29]. Recent research in the private sector context has effectively demonstrated that the adoption of a variety of IT governance mechanisms yields better IS strategic alignment, which can result in higher levels of organizational performance [61]. Most research on IT governance has taken place in the private sector and it is unclear how well the theories and findings of the private sector port to the public sector. While government is increasingly acting similarly to the private sector as part of the new public management (NPM) initiatives in the United States and Europe, several issues arise from simply porting private sector studies to the public sector and particularly to state government—our research setting. First, private sector studies frequently adopt a principal–agent perspective on governance and use a classical view of agency theory to predict and describe the choice of governance mechanisms. This view is based on a belief that, if unchecked, the agent will behave opportunistically and the role of the governance is, therefore, to ensure that the agent’s actions are consistent with the goals of the principal. However, in the public sector, evidence suggests that an additional problem is the prudent allocation of scarce resources due to the often conflicting goals of elected and appointed officials [60]. Without the private sector’s unifying goal of profit maximization, public sector governance can get caught up in disputes over allocation of resources as evidenced by the failure of 25 of the 50 U.S. states to pass a budget during their regular session in 2015 and the U.S. federal government’s shut downs in 2011, 2013, and 2016. This public sector allocation problem diminishes the value of classical agency theory, with its focus on controls to limit actor opportunism, and seemingly demands the use of a theory that is better focused on allocation mechanisms. Legal agency theory focuses on allocation of resources and seems promising for research in this context. Second, a key component of private sector IT governance, the board of directors, does not exist in the public sector; therefore, we need to identify suitable proxies within the public sector in order to use existing theories. Given the criticality of board involvement in effective IT governance [32], this is a significant limitation in applying private sector research to the public sector. Third, other potential contributors to good governance in the public sector have been routinely ignored. For example, the composition of different IT steering committees has been shown to be salient in the private sector but no comparable studies have examined it in the public sector. Similarly, the structural relationship between the public sector ’s Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) and the

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1183

governor has been routinely ignored as has the use of different funding models to allocate resources and control for opportunism. Finally, in the private sector, most performance outcomes attributed to governance that have been examined assess outcomes for the principal and the agent but no known studies in the public sector have sought to understand if configurations of good governance mechanisms create positive outcomes for both the principal and the agent. That is, it is unclear whether principal (agent) level outcomes in any way diminish agent (principal) level outcomes or the same IT governance practices result in better outcomes for both. Despite these limitations, the broad goals of private sector IT governance and public sector IT governance are the same: improved performance. Thus, insights may be gained by adopting, applying and extending a private sector theory of IT governance to better understand public sector IT governance. Our primary research question is, therefore: How do the state legislature, IT steering committee, the OCIO, and different funding models contribute to state (principal) and IT department (agent) success? In answering this question we will contribute to the theoretical understanding of IT governance in the public sector as well as improve its functioning. Our research domain is public sector IT governance within each state within the United States. Accordingly, our unit of analysis is the individual state. Our study answers repeated calls for more research in the public sector in order to understand key differences in public and private sector governance and operations [33, 45]. For this analysis, we adapt, apply, and significantly extend legal agency theory in order to guide our analysis and apply a configurational method to understand the combinations of governance mechanisms that create good governance for both the principal (the state) and the agent (the IT department).

Theoretical Background and Propositions IT Governance and Agency
IT governance differs from IT management. IT management is internally focused and is concerned with the effective and efficient supply of IT services and products [55]. In our current study, IT management is represented by the IT department. IT governance is considered a more broad concept and concentrates on transforming information technology to meet the current and future demands of the business as well as the needs of the business customer [47]. The ideal governance structure is created when there is a correct fit between governance decision making and location of domain and technical specific knowledge [55]. To do this properly it is necessary for the organization to focus on the value of information systems and establish sufficient controls over IT management in order to create and sustain benefits. A key focus of this is determining who has the ability to make key IT-related decisions [59]. There is a great deal of variation in terms of how organizations define accountability for IT governance and how well they formalize and communicate it [59]. Without a

1184

DAWSON ET AL.

formal and structured IT governance process, organizational leaders handle IT governance decisions on an individualized, ad hoc basis, and these individual decisions can be at odds with those of others or even organizational goals [4, 59]. In the face of such problems, the majority of the research on governance within the private sector has used classical agency theory as its theoretical basis [37]. Under this view of agency theory, agents (management) are believed to be rational actors who are interested in maximizing their individual utility, even at the expense of the principals (shareholders) [31]. In short, agents are believed to be opportunistic and a key goal of governance under classical agency theory is for the principal to manage that opportunism through two major mechanisms: financial incentives and governance structures [31]. For the former, the board of directors (acting at the direction of the shareholders) can create financial incentives, such as compensation based on stock price performance, that are believed to create goal alignment. For the latter, the principal can impose governance structures to monitor the actions of management to ensure they are acting to maximize value to the shareholders. However, classical agency theory has been subjected to criticism with respect to being overly simplistic and unrealistic [30]; lacking an understanding of the complexity of human actions [17]; ignoring the demands of a social existence [25]; lacking empirical verisimilitude [27]; and ignoring the merging of individual ego with corporate prestige [20]. Further, as noted by Lan and Heracleous, “the control and selfinterest-oriented assumptions of [classical] agency theory are deemed unsuitable for offering a rounded understanding of corporate governance systems that encompass collaborative behaviors or that operate in other contexts than mature market-oriented economies” [37, p. 294]. Finally, recent research in an IT context has found linkages between ethical behavior and positive organizational outcomes including innovation [6]. Given these concerns, it is not surprising that a large body of empirical research on classical agency theory has failed to support its efficacy [11, 12]. Despite advancements in NPM efforts to adopt private sector business practices in the public sector, the public sector differs from the private sector in two important ways: the absence of profit maximization as a unifying objective and the existence of public service motivation (PSM). Together, these differences further undermine the potential value of classical agency theory in examining public sector IT governance. First, public organizations have a multitude of stakeholders who often have competing interests. The elected officials who play a key role with regard to the oversight of public organizations seldom agree on the overall goals and priorities for government actions. Public sector scholars have noted that, even in the face of a clear mission, individuals are distracted by “multiple, ambiguous and conflicting goals” [60, p. 568]. A fundamental challenge for the public sector is in establishing priorities to enable choosing between these interests [37]. Unlike the private sector, the public sector lacks the unifying theme of profit maximization to establish priorities and resolve competing interests. Absent this focus, we seek an alternative framework to consider efforts to balance competing interests. Second, evidence suggests that the motivations of public sector employees differ from those of private sector employees. Under the concept of public service

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1185

motivation (PSM), public sector employees have a stronger sense of public service and this belief influences how they act on the job [40]. PSM is defined by Perry and Wise as “an individual’s predisposition to respond to motives grounded primarily or uniquely in public institutions and organizations” [46, p. 368]. Employees with high PSM are more willing to defend public interests [5], have higher organizational commitment [9], and work harder than private sector employees [41]. As a result, PSM has the potential to serve as a public sector counterweight to the self-interest theories used in the private sector [60]. Although empirical results from PSM testing are mixed, some of the variation in salience of PSM studies is based on different conceptualizations and measurement of PSM and, as Rainey concludes, “the stream of research and theorizing has sufficient consistency and moment to establish PSM as a viable topic . . . [and] having significance and value in both research and practice” [53, p. 247]. Taken together, the competition for scarce resources compounded by lack of clear organization goals in the public sector coupled with the more altruistic motives of public sector employees suggest that a different perspective on agency theory may be insightful in the public sector. We propose applying the legal view of agency theory as one such perspective that acts as a critical reexamination of agency theory and its use in corporate governance research [37]. In this study, we explicitly adopt the contractual/aggregate legal theory of the corporation and the director primacy model of corporate governance. Within this branch of legal agency theory, the controlling decisions are made by elected representatives (of shareholders in the private sector and of citizens in the public sector). With the director primacy model, elected representatives rather than management are charged with making decisions for the organization. Further delineation of the differences between the legal view of agency theory based on director primacy and classical agency theory is instructive. First, under classical agency theory, the principal in the principal–agent relationship refers to the shareholders of the firm [21], whereas under the legal view, the organization itself is seen as the principal [37]. This is an important distinction within the public sector, where the concept of shareholders simply does not exist. By shifting the role of principal to the organization, the tenets of legal agency theory can be applied. This is appropriate in the context of government organizations based on analogies to three motivations for redefining the principal in an agency relationship [37]: (1) federal, state, and local government entities have independent legal status through which contracts are made, property is owned, and liabilities for debts exist; (2) citizens and taxpayers lack separable ownership of government entities; (3) elected officials, acting on behalf of government entities, are subject to significant personal liabilities arising from actions taken in their official capacities.1 This provides clear support for the idea that, within the public sector, the governmental organization (i.e., the state itself) is most appropriately thought of as the principal. Second, in classical agency theory in the private sector, the board of directors serves as the first-order agent [19], whereas under the legal view the board is not an agent but an “autonomous fiduciary” [37]. In this role, the board acts act on behalf of the shareholders but its autonomy is derived from the fact that directors are not directly

1186

DAWSON ET AL.

controlled by any party, including the shareholders [3]. Some terminology used to explicate legal agency theory is problematic for the public sector—shareholders and boards of directors do not exist. However, as will be detailed below, certain government entities such as legislative oversight committees and officially sanctioned steering committees take on responsibilities that are, in many respects, comparable to the board of directors and may serve as a suitable proxy. Thus, the concept of board autonomy as described in legal agency theory, can be adapted to the public sector using this proxy. Because the elected officials—similar to directors in the private sector—are the primary decision makers, the director primacy model is applicable. Finally, under classical agency theory, the role of the board is to monitor potentially opportunistic managers. In contrast, legal agency theory proposes that the role of the board is to act as a “mediating hierarch” to balance the demands of different stakeholders and make decisions based on their often competing demands [37]. The mediating hierarch has legitimacy and exercises legal authority, but has the ability to balance between hard contractual and more informal relational control mechanisms [28]. Three aspects of the board of directors from legal agency theory are relevant when making comparisons to similar governance bodies in the public sector [37]. First, as a product of director primacy model, the board of directors is presumed to be motivated by a sense of collective goal alignment, intrinsic motivation, and other characteristics associated with PSM. Second, to fulfill the role of the mediating hierarch, a board must be independent of the various stakeholders. Third, the board makes decisions on allocating resources based on satisficing outcomes for each stakeholder group and while recognizing stakeholder power differentials in resource allocation decisions The application, adaptation, and extension of legal agency theory from the private sector to the public sector is a novel contribution of this study. We seek to adapt this theory to and empirically test it in the context of public sector IT governance in an effort to demonstrate the outcomes of effective governance for the agent (IT department) and the principal (state).

Legislative Oversight Committee—Strategic Mediating Hierarch
Under classical agency theory, the role of the board of directors is to monitor management to ensure that management actions do not diverge from the interests of the principal [21]. However, under the legal view of agency theory, the board of directors is a “mediating hierarch” whose role is to balance the competing claims and interests of different stakeholders inside and outside the organization [37]. In exercising this function, the board makes decisions about how to apply scarce resources [3] in order to maximize returns to the organization as a whole [37]. According to legal agency theory, the firm is represented as a team production model whereby all firm stakeholders cede control to the board as an independent and trusted entity. The board’s job is to develop a prioritization and allocation scheme to balance each stakeholder ’s competing interests in a sufficient fashion to ensure that

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1187

the each stakeholder receives enough so that they continue to contribute to the greater good of the organization but do not receive more than their share [37]. While the public sector lacks a true board of directors, many states have an appointed committee of elected legislators who are charged with overseeing the strategic use of technology within the state. These committees, referred to as legislative oversight committees (LOCs), have governance-related charters that focus on their role in determining priorities for IT use/deployment and allocation of scarce resources. We posit that these public sector LOCs fill a governance role at the strategic level similar to that of the private sector board of directors. For example, the State of Maryland has an LOC (the Joint Technology Oversight Committee) composed of 12 legislators appointed by the House speaker and Senate president with the responsibility to “increase knowledge, awareness and support of technology . . . and may study any issues relating to information technology” [38, p. 1], which aligns with the definition of IT governance in which boards are called to “[provide] leadership and organizational structures and processes that ensure that the organization’s IT sustains and extends the organization’s strategies and objectives” [29, p. 10)]. LOC outputs are typically a series of IT strategy documents on different topics approved by the body. For example, in 2007, New Hampshire’s LOC authorized the creation of a geographic information system (GIS) strategy document to guide the implementation of GIS across the state. The document described the overall goals for implementing the GIS, key internal and external players, the legislative and budgetary process, and a timeline for implementing GIS within the state. This nearly 50-page document clearly specified to the state CIO the priorities of the LOC regarding GIS implementation and clearly articulated the role of the CIO (among others) in achieving that implementation. It also made clear the roles of the different stakeholders and showed how the LOC sought to balance competing perspectives. We posit that if a state government has an LOC functioning as a strategic mediating hierarch in government—similar in manner to and acting as a proxy for the board of directors in a corporation—the LOC will contribute to two salient outcomes. First, we suggest that LOC involvement will increase the performance of the state’s IT department since the LOC establishes the appropriate IT and information systems (IS) capabilities necessary to deliver basic services to state residents, implement legislative and policy requirements, support efficient operations in state departments and agencies, and allow various state entities to utilize information for the benefit of the citizenry. Absent an LOC, the IT department is more likely to lack a clear understanding of the strategic priorities of the state and thus have a much more difficult time in enacting IT that best supports the state as well as the associated positive organizational outcomes that result from it. The LOC, acting in the role of a strategic mediating hierarch, would consider the needs of the competing stakeholders—legislative bodies, the governor, various service providers, citizens, watchdog and special interest groups, and so on—and then direct the CIO regarding how to prioritize initiatives and allocate scarce IT resources so as to maximize the benefit across all areas of state responsibility in the delivery of services.

1188

DAWSON ET AL.

Second, we posit that an LOC will contribute to better overall state performance in using information since the direction provided by the LOC should be more consistent with the overall best interests of the state (i.e., principal), as expressed through legislative and budgetary processes, particularly in the face of conflicting objectives. The LOC, as the strategic mediating hierarch, brings greater clarity to high-level state needs to direct what is going to be done that best meets the interests of all production team members (including the IT department). Thus, superior organizational-level (i.e., state government) outcomes are more likely to result.

Business-Centric IT Steering Committee—Tactical Mediating Hierarch
Effective IT governance is not the sole responsibility of the board or LOC since management also plays a key role [15]. That is, while IT is included as part of corporate governance, the strategic mediating hierarch is responsible only for “the determination of the broad uses to which organizational resources will be deployed” [10, p. 375]. A great deal of tactical detail still needs to be determined and we posit that these responsibilities fall primarily to the IT steering committee and the CIO. We first address the role of the IT steering committee. While the role of the LOC in IT governance is focused on establishing the overall strategy, the IT steering committee is usually focused on lateral coordination between organizational units and is generally staffed by members of the internal IT department and high-level representatives from other key business units [35]. Working together, these business and IT leaders refine and enact the overall IT strategy of the firm at a tactical level [18]; the IT steering committee is responsible for implementing the priorities and strategies created by the LOC. While legal agency theory focuses on the role of the board in acting as a strategic mediating hierarch, we argue that, in the public sector, the IT steering committee acts as the tactical mediating hierarch. Consider the role of the mediating hierarch in legal agency theory: to balance “the often competing claims and interests of the groups that contribute to the team production process, [make] decisions on the allocations of team surpluses, and is . . . in control of the corporation’s assets” [37, p. 295]. This is at the heart of the IT steering committee’s responsibilities; drawing on IT department and agency representatives to allocate and prioritize within the bounds of the resources and direction provided by the LOC at the strategic level. To understand why this extension is appropriate, it is necessary to understand the budgeting process in state government. In each state, the budget is composed of two distinct pieces: continuing operations and new initiatives. An example of continuing operations would be the recurring cost to operate a data center for the human services department. Costs vary little from year to year and there is little negotiation about changes in the amount. For new initiatives, such as the ones that the LOC would direct the state government to implement as part of its role as a mediating hierarch, most states follow a very similar process.

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1189

However, the department’s choice regarding how to apply the budget only needs to comply with “legislative intent.” That is, the department needs to follow the general purposes of the money as defined by the LOC. However, given that the LOC provides strategic but not tactical guidance, an individual department has considerable leeway to expend the budgeted resources for a given initiative. It seems reasonable to expect, based on this tactical flexibility, that different stakeholders could have very different ideas on the best way to spend the budgeted money. Thus, we suggest that an IT steering committee, like the LOC, acts as a lower-level, tactical mediating hierarch for the competing stakeholders within the domain of state IT investments. We define a business-centric IT steering committee as one that is led by someone outside of the IT department and/or that has the majority of its members from outside the IT department and contrast it with an IT-centric IT steering committee that is dominated by IT leadership and membership. We contend that a businesscentric IT steering committee may have the capability to function effectively as a tactical mediating hierarch navigating the different stakeholder groups and their competing interests while adhering to the strategic interests and intent of the LOC. In contrast, an IT-centric IT steering committee may have difficulty balancing the claims of the different groups since it lacks sufficient business domain knowledge to establish priorities or properly allocate team resources. A business-centric IT steering committee, by virtue of being led by those individuals responsible for the operations, service delivery, and performance of the various departments and agencies, would have a far greater ability to understand, evaluate, and balance the claims of the various stakeholders vying for funding. We thus posit that a business-centric IT steering committee can outperform an IT-centric IT steering committee due to better knowledge regarding how the state delivers its services. Further, we argue that, by dint of its knowledge of the business and its ability to make effective, businesssupporting tactical decisions, a business-centric IT steering committee will result in a better-performing IT department and improved state performance.

Fee-for-Service Funding Model—Team Production Control Mechanism
In the public sector, IT funding can come from numerous sources including budgetary assessments, personnel assessments, bond issues, the federal government, fee-for-service arrangements with other state agencies, nonfederal grants, interest from investments, state capital funds, state general funds, website ads, and website fees, among others. While most states receive funding from several of these sources, the most common sources are allocations such as budgetary assessments and state general funds or fee-forservice funding payments. The former can be viewed as a cost-center model and the latter as a profit-center model, both of which are viable IT funding arrangements [7]. With a fee-for-service structure, IT services are unbundled and each individual agency and department decides funding levels and what services it will pay to

1190

DAWSON ET AL.

receive. As such, under a fee-for-service arrangement, the business unit retains substantial control over the spending and the timing of the spending on IT-related services from the IT department. Therefore, we argue that use of a fee-for-service funding model will outperform states that use other funding models and the reasons for this lie in the control dimensions of legal agency theory. A typical scenario in a state works as follows. An individual agency/department is allocated funds to “purchase” IT services and, within certain constraints, can choose to purchase individual services (e.g., data-center hosting) from the state central IT department, other state departments that may own a data center, or, in some cases, from external service providers. This kind of market is far larger than most realize. For example, in 2008 the State of California operated 365,000 square feet of data centers spread over 400 locations and containing 11,600 servers. Numerous private companies, including Verizon and Microsoft, also provided data-center hosting services to various state entities in California. Because this is a quasi-market rather than a true market, the business unit is generally permitted to select from only a limited set of potential hosting service providers but it still has latitude to select the data center that it feels best meets its needs. While the central data center for the state may be the only choice under an allocation budgeting method, under a fee-for-service model, the business unit has more latitude. Whether through authorizing legislation or policies and procedures established by the LOC or IT steering committee, the objective of the fee-for-service model is cost effective services for the state as a whole. As such, the LOC or IT steering committee, acting as a mediating hierarch, will create performance monitoring systems to reward effective use of fee-for-service budgeting and that will serve to minimize unit opportunism [37]. Given the potential competition from other state entities and potential external vendors, a fee-for-service funding model acts as a constraint on a potentially opportunistic central IT department to maintain service levels and the cost efficiency of services provided. Thus, states with predominantly a fee-for-service funding model will have better IT departmental performance and better overall state performance.

Independent Office of the Chief Information Officer—Team Production Enabler
Within the states, the establishment of the CIO position and organization has generally followed the guidance in the 1996 federal Clinger–Cohen Act (CCA) (also known as the Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996). The goal of CCA was to establish a comprehensive approach for managing information resources to accomplish the strategic goals of the government. CCA made several demands on federal agencies with a significant one being the requirement that each agency establish a CIO who, along with the OCIO, would have the visibility and responsibility to carry out the strategic vision of the agency. While CCA was only mandated for federal agencies, many state governments also adopted it and established the role of the CIO and the OCIO within the state. Since CCA did

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1191

not mandate reporting structure for the OCIO, many reporting structures were established: OCIO directly reporting to the governor, OCIO indirectly reporting to the governor (through an intermediate agency, most commonly the Department of Finance) or as an independent agency [8]. While an effective OCIO may be able to provide value under any reporting structure, an independent OCIO can work to balance priorities dictated by the executive and legislature branches (through the LOC or directly through law and statute) with the interests of the IT department and other stakeholders to provide IT services and resource allocation decisions that maximize benefits across all stakeholders. The independent OCIO is, therefore, able to create relationships with the mediating hierarchs and stakeholders and apply their social capital to meet organizational goals [34]. The independent OCIO is a governance mechanism that enables the team production process [37], which is necessary to provide the myriad of IT capabilities and services required by state government. Hence, key benefits should result. First, an independent OCIO should have better efficiency of operations and better performance of the IT department. This outcome is a result of reduced friction between the other stakeholders and the IT department. Second, an independent OCIO should be better able to provide IT services that support the state, thus resulting in higher state performance. When reporting directly or indirectly to the governor, the ability of the OCIO to do what is perceived to be best for the state as a whole may be compromised as all decisions will be subject to political influences and carry political overtones. As an independent team member, the CIO can better understand the overall goals of the state and can produce better IT departmental outcomes [16].

Propositions
Configuration theories are based on the recognition that patterns of conditions, rather than individual elements, are stronger determinants of organizational outcomes and that multiple condition patterns may yield the same outcome. While we can and do test for individual contributions, we believe that it is the combinations of elements— recipes—that lead to outcomes. As such, our research model presented in Figure 1 assumes interaction between all elements. We first posit that combinations of an involved LOC, a business-centric IT steering committee, a fee-for-service funding model, and an independent OCIO will lead to improved IT departmental (agent) performance. The involved LOC will provide the overall high level of strategic guidance on the direction of the state to the independent OCIO while the business-centric IT steering committee will provide valuable details on the operationalization of the LOC’s strategic vision. By using a fee-for-service based funding approach in combination with the LOC and a business-centric IT steering committee, the state can best achieve higher levels of IT departmental (agent) performance. This brings to bear all of the elements of legal agency theory on the IT department. Due to our expectations of equifinality, we express our

1192

DAWSON ET AL.

Figure 1. Research Model

proposition in a manner that allows for configurations that may subsume, in multiple ways, the expectation that all four conditions must be present for the outcome to occur. Proposition 1: Combinations of an involved LOC, a business-centric IT steering committee, a fee-for-service funding model, and an independent OCIO will lead to improved IT departmental (agent) performance. As per our model and legal agency, the use of the same contributing conditions for both outcomes recognizes that state governments will choose a configuration made up of these conditions with the expectation that the configuration will benefit both IT departmental performance and state performance. As such, we posit that with the involvement of the LOC, organization of a business-centric IT steering committee, a fee-for-service funding model, and an independent OCIO, the state can also best achieve higher levels of state (principal) performance as it relates to information technology. Again, key elements of legal agency theory are seen to interact in various combinations to improve state-level outcomes. Proposition 2: Combinations of an involved LOC, a business-centric IT steering committee, a fee-for-service funding model, and an independent OCIO will lead to improved state (principal) performance.

Methods and Operationalization Method
Correlational and configurational comparative methods differ in terms of the insights that can be drawn and, as a result, provide opportunities to address different research

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1193

questions by leveraging different strengths [36, 57]. Correlational techniques are the dominant paradigm for positivist IT research, but there have been calls for over a decade to incorporate configurational methods such as qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) as part of the tool set for IS researchers [22]. Configurational methods like QCA better identify the patterns that exist across a subset of cases (i.e., specific configurations of causal influences), thus allowing for more complex causal relationships to surface [57]. Specifically, QCA allows for complex interactions of multiple conditions to occur and also allows for the existence of multiple paths to success or failure. Configurational approaches use different assumptions regarding causality than those used in correlational approaches such as structural equation modeling (SEM) [2]. First, configurational approaches do not assume that each condition has its own unique impact on the outcome, rather, it may instead only have an impact in combination with another condition. Each significant variable is viewed in correlational approaches as having an individual and additive impact on the outcome from the others. Second, there are many paths (i.e., multiple combinations) that may produce the outcome, each of which is viable and theoretically substantiated by a subset of the available cases. Correlation approaches result in a single optimal equation or model based on estimated best fit with the totality of the data available. Third, in some cases a condition can contribute to a positive outcome in some configurations and a negative outcome in others. In correlational approaches a positive coefficient indicates that if a variable is positive, it will contribute positively to the outcome, whereas if the same variable is negative, it will contribute negatively. Fourth, causal asymmetry is assumed, in that positive and negative outcomes are described by different configurations. In contrast, correlational approaches assume that the same model is equally applicable to positive and negative outcomes. The different assumptions between configurational and correlational approaches noted above can be summarized as for configurational approaches, different combinations of antecedents can lead to the same outcome, which are referred to respectively as causal complexity and equifinality [48]. While all significant conditions in correlational approaches are necessary and sufficient, in configurational approaches they may be necessary, sufficient, both, or INUS.2 Configuration theories can be operationalized using a set-theoretic approach [24]. This approach relies on set membership to define relationships between constructs, with Boolean algebra used to determine configurations of value. The method for operationalizing and testing configuration theories is through QCA. This method combines qualitative (case-based) and quantitative (variable-oriented) techniques [2]. QCA is ideal when working with an intermediate number of cases (generally defined as 30–50) [52]. A specific form of QCA where the values of the conditions are binary is called crisp set QCA (csQCA) [48]. In csQCA, values of each condition are set to 0 or 1 to denote whether an element is present or absent [54]. This is a useful technique when binary terms are prevalent in the data (i.e., male/female) or when a continuous or

1194

DAWSON ET AL.

ordinal scale can be logically divided (i.e., old/young). An alternative form of QCA is fuzzy set QCA (fsQCA), which is used more frequently with ordinal or continuous conditions. As we will discuss in our operationalization section, the conditions used in this study are most logically dichotomized, hence the selection of csQCA rather than fsQCA as our analysis approach for the study. It should be noted that in both forms of QCA—crisp set and fuzzy set—the outcome condition must be binary and hence dichotomized as the outcome either occurs or fails to occur. There are three main steps in QCA [23]. The first step is to take operationalized sets of cases and construct a dichotomous data table in which each of the cases is represented on a row and each column represents a causal condition and the outcome of interest [54]. The second step is designed to reduce the number of rows to a truth table, which is a table of configurations—that is, each configuration that yields a particular outcome [54]. This is done by exhaustively identifying the possible combinations—2k, where k is the number of conditions—and then identifying what cases fit each configuration. The third step is designed to address the logical reduction of the truth table into simplified combinations [23, 49]. Set-theoretic statements from the truth table are reduced to prime implicants, that is, a combination that cannot be covered by another combination. Three solutions are generated— a complex solution, an intermediate solution, and a parsimonious solution—each with increasing application of logical remainders (possible configurations for which there are no observations) to simplify the solution. This process identifies conditions with evidence of strong causal relationships with outcomes as “core”—existing only in the parsimonious solution—and those with weaker relationships as “peripheral”— existing in both parsimonious and intermediate solutions—resulting in critical configuration elements around which minor elements contribute [23].

Sample
Data were collected from three archival sources: the National Association of State CIOs (NASCIO) (LOC, independent CIO, business-centric IT steering committee, and fee-for-service funding), the Grading the States project from the Center for Digital Government (CDG) (IT departmental performance), and the Government Performance Project (GPP) from the Pew Center on the States (PCS) (state performance). NASCIO is a member organization of state-level chief information officers and senior information resource executives from all 50 of the United States and six U.S. territories and the District of Columbia. All of its members are senior officials from one of the three branches of government and have executive-level and statewide responsibility for information systems management for their state. In early 2001, 2002, 2004, and 2005, the NASCIO, working through its members, issued a survey titled “Survey of Digital Government in the States” as a means to gather data from each of the states. The 2005 survey resulted in a compendium that had over 40 questions and yielded 449 separate data elements. Respondents reported spending

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1195

between a few days and a few weeks to gather all of the data necessary to complete the survey. A small number of additional questions have been added since 2001 but the survey and the number of respondents has remained basically unchanged since its inception. In 2005, complete responses were received from 46 states plus the District of Columbia. An unusual strength of our analysis is that it contains virtually every organization (state) within the industry (state government); this level of participation would be virtually impossible within another industry, such as financial services or pharmaceuticals. NASCIO Compendium data has been used over 500 times in scholarly research including numerous times in top public administration journals. The CDG ranks states on how effectively technology is used and deployed within the state. Starting in 2001, the CDG has surveyed the states for their effective technology usage and has been providing a ranked order of the 25 most-effective states. This survey has been produced in 2001, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012. Because the CDG did not do a ranking in 2005 (like the compendium and the PCS data), we conducted a paired sample t-test of the 2004 and 2006 data and found no statistically significant differences (p = .929). Given the strong similarity between 2004 and 2006, we used the 2006 data. The CDG identifies and ranks only the top 25 states, so those in the report were assessed as high performing and those not in the report were assessed as low performing—all 50 states were, therefore, included in the sample.3 The CDG generates an evaluation of state-level IT performance along six dimensions, including: provisioning of online services to various constituencies; effectiveness of project planning and execution; the use of technology to support collaboration; the implementation of an effective architecture; maturity of services deployed; and the modernization of computing and network infrastructures [26]. This represents a robust and comprehensive assessment based on those activities that would be associated with the basic operations and responsibilities of state IT organizations. The Digital States Survey has been used over 40 times in academic research, mostly within quality journals. The creation of the GPP is a joint effort of academics, the Pew Charitable Trusts, and Governing Magazine, and is designed to provide resources for in-depth news reporting and academic research. In addition to gathering state data from public sources (e.g., auditor reports, state websites, state capital budgets, workforce plans, etc.), PSC also interviewed over 1,400 individuals for its 2008 report including legislators, fiscal analysts, budget officers, CIOs, agency representatives, and leaders of civic organizations. PSC assigns an overall grade as a basis for evaluating state performance, along with grades in regard to how effectively the state performs in the areas of information, people, money, and infrastructure. The focus of the state evaluations was to capture the actual results, at the state level, of the effective management of and use of information to impact the lives of state citizens [1]. Thus, the GPP represents a robust and comprehensive measure of state-level performance. Since 2001, over 2,300 articles, including many in top public policy academic journals, have cited GPP data as a primary data source. We used data from the 2005 GPP in our analysis to be consistent with the 2005 Compendium data.

1196

DAWSON ET AL.

Operationalization of Constructs
Legislative Oversight Committee Involvement: In 2005, 31 states had a House committee that focused on state-government IT issues and 28 states had a Senate committee that focused on state-government IT issues. Of these states, only 6 had 1 committee or the other; the remainder had both. These committees generally met 4 times per year. Since, by statute, the committees are required to meet and not meeting would be considered a serious breach, we have little doubt that the committees met as required and, therefore, have the potential to constitute a present and effective oversight mechanism. If the state had either a House or a Senate committee (or both), we considered the LOC Involvement to be high.4 Otherwise, if they had no LOC oversight, we assessed it to be low. A total of 46 states provided this information. Business-Centric IT Steering Committee: Thirty-five states had an IT steering committee composed of representatives from the IS department and representatives from functional areas (e.g., judicial branch, public education, etc.). A businesscentric IT steering committee was considered high if more than 50 percent of the members are from outside the IT department, otherwise we assessed it to be low. Fee-for-Service Funding: IT budget revenue sources are generally either centrally allocated to the IT department or devolved to the agency level. A significant majority of CIOs rely on their budgets from either state general funds (central allocation) or fee-for-service arrangements (department-led contributions). Fee-forService Funding was high if departments received more than 50 percent of their funding in a fee-for-service arrangement. A total of 37 states provided complete data on their funding model for the IT department. Independent OCIO: The reporting structure of the OCIO and IT office varies by state. In some cases, the CIO reports directly to the governor ’s office or indirectly (through another department); in other cases, the CIO has a stand-alone and independent department. There were 45 states reporting this data. Agent Performance—IT Departmental Performance: The Digital States Survey from the Center for Digital Government provided data for effective IT department (agent) performance. This 2006 survey is unambiguous and provides the strongest evidence about the state’s effective use of IT. The CDG only shows the rankings for states 1–25 (including 2 ties, so there are actually 27 states identified) and we thus use those ranked in the report for Current Year Effective Technology Performance as high performing for our analysis and those not identified as low. As the top 27 states were identified in the report, the list of bottom 23 states was inferred. Principal Performance—State Performance: Within the PCS GPP, we used the overall grade for Information, which is focused on the collection, management, and application of data and information supporting policymaking, resource allocation, and program assessment in an open and transparent manner. Within the GPP, the grade is presented as a letter grade (A–F) and, as appropriate, uses a plus/minus scheme. We used the 2005 GPP grades for State Performance and ranked those

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1197

states with a B– or higher grade as high performing and those with a C+ or lower grade as low performing. All 50 states were graded on their performance. In using secondary data, we acknowledge that we are making a trade-off between the breadth of data and coverage of the population of interest with the ability to interview participants and engage in primary data research. While we cannot validate our data elements in the same manner that a primary researcher could validate survey items, we note that these data have been used in top quality IS journals including in Decision Support Systems [14, 43], Management Science [44], Journal of Strategic Information Systems [13], and Government Information Quarterly [42]. However, notwithstanding these recent examples of using these secondary data, we recognize that concerns about the age of the data may linger, given the speed with which information technology changes. However, we do not believe that the age of the data poses a valid concern. First, we are aware of no other data set that has 92 percent of the companies within that industry providing standardized and directly comparable data for analysis and understanding. It is only because of the completeness and direct comparability of the data that this analysis can be done. Second, the approaches to governance are fairly well-established, particularly in the public sector, and we have no reason to believe that any of the foundational aspects of the structure have changed. Third, the functions of government change very little over time and no known evidence indicates substantive shifts in government practices. If fact, recent research using similar secondary data demonstrates the limited impact of technology changes on various government practices [14]. For the purpose of replication, we have included the complete coded database used for our analyses in Online Appendix A.

Results and Interpretation
Table 1 identifies the descriptive statistics and correlations of our constructs. Because correlational and configurational approaches are based on very different assumptions, we present correlations specifically to provide a counterpoint for comparison to our later configurational findings. The first step of the configurational analysis is to create the truth table. The truth tables both include LOC Involvement, Business-Centric IT Steering Committee, Fee-for-Service Funding, and Independent CIO. With four conditions, sixteen possible configurations are presented in the truth tables (see Appendix B for IT department and Appendix C for the state). Prior to looking for INUS conditions, we first established that there were no necessary conditions that appear in all the outcomes. Necessary conditions are those in which all or almost all appearances of a condition result in an outcome. These can be identified through crosstabs between the outcome and each condition at a 90 percent level or greater. Because none of the conditions approached the 90 percent mark, we conclude that there are no single necessary conditions that lead to higher IT departmental or state performance (see Appendix D).

1198

DAWSON ET AL.

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations Mean SD N 1
1. State Information Performance 2. IT Departmental Performance 3. LOC Involvement 4. Business-Centric ITSC 5. Fee-for-Service Funding Model 6. Independent OCIO 0.44 0.53 0.67 0.54 0.65 0.36 0.5

2

3

4

5

6
0.202 0.384** 0.299* –0.07 0.319* 1

50 1 0.206 0.295* 1 0.232 1

0.318 –0.142 0.132 0.390*

0.51 50 0.47 46 0.51 35 0.48 40 0.48 45

–0.127 0.121 1 –0.004 1

*Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (two-tailed). **Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (two-tailed).

Prior to presenting our csQCA results, we explain the notation, which is adopted from Ragin and Fiss [51] and Fiss [23]. In this notation, black circles ( ) indicate the necessary presence of a condition and crossed-out circles ( ) indicate its necessary absence. Where present, a large circle ( ) indicates a core condition and a small circle ( ) indicates a peripheral condition. The absence of a circle indicates that presence or absence of the condition does not influence the outcome (i.e., the same result occurs whether the condition is present or absent). To provide optimal presentation clarity, solutions are grouped by core conditions (i.e., A, B, and C have the same core conditions). A necessary and sufficient condition would be demonstrated by a configuration with a single condition present or absent, whereas an INUS condition would be demonstrated with multiple conditions present or absent in the same configuration. In the following two sections, we present and interpret the results for high performance and low performance of both the IT department (agent) and the state (principal). The crisp set application of fsQCA 2.5 [50] was used in this analysis.

IT Departmental Performance—Agent Performance
The results of our crisp set analysis in Table 2 show good evidence of equifinality: that is, two configurations are capable of providing high IT departmental performance. The common feature of both positive configurations is the presence of a fee-forservice funding model. This represents a valuable mechanism for business users (e.g., the departments, agencies, and other state entities) to ensure that the IT department provides required services. Ultimately, business users are only willing to pay if the services provided fit their goals. Therefore, by controlling the purse strings the business users can influence the IT department. As such, the services provided by the IT department are more likely to be aligned to the needs of the

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1199

Table 2. IT Departmental Performance High IT Departmental Performance Configuration
LOC Involvement Business-centric IT Steering Committee Fee-for-Service Funding Model Independent OCIO Consistency Raw coverage Unique coverage Overall solution consistency Overall solution coverage 0.900 0.500 0.278 0.923 0.667 1.000 0.389 0.167 1.000 0.231 0.231 1.000 0.231 0.231 1.000 0.538 1.000 0.077 0.077

Low IT Departmental Performance 1 2 3

1

2

business yielding higher departmental performance in the presence of a fee-forservice model. In the dominant configuration (High 1), the influence of the independent OCIO on high IT department performance demonstrates clear support for the idea that the OCIO fills a valuable role in a team production process when combined with the feefor-service funding model. In order to provide the various business users what they want, an independent OCIO affords the autonomy needed to monitor various competing interests, both internal and external to the IT department, and to balance priorities and resource allocations in the way the CIO believes to maximize the outcomes for all interested parties relative to executive, legislative, and other environmental influences. However, this autonomy is tempered by the alignment of IT department priorities with the short leash of the fee-for-service funding model. As such, the independent OCIO has the freedom to follow the needs of the business users (expressed in the fee-for-service approach) rather than pursue the priorities of the governor or any other single team member. Interestingly, this configuration focuses entirely on the team production aspects of legal agency theory rather than relating on the mediating hierarch elements of the theory. In the secondary configuration (High 2), the LOC and the business-centric IT steering committee, using a fee-for-service funding model, achieve high IT departmental performance regardless of the presence of an independent OCIO. While the first configuration focuses on the production role of the OCIO, the second configuration influences IT department performance due to the LOC and the businesscentric IT steering committee successfully acting in the role of mediating hierarchs to establish priorities that effectively balance the myriad of competing interests. Their

1200

DAWSON ET AL.

influence is reinforced in implementation by the fee-for-service funding mechanism. In this configuration, the LOC and business-centric IT steering committee decide what should get funded (as strategic and tactical mediating hierarchs) and then provide those funds to the business users to disburse using the fee-for-service model. By doing this, the LOC and the business-centric IT steering committees can both influence funding and then allow the business users to enforce/control it. This configuration is very consistent with the mediating hierarch role suggested by legal agency theory. Taken together, the two positive configurations suggest that the OCIO and the LOC plus business-centric IT steering committee can act as substitutes for each other given that either configuration yields positive outcomes.5 Given that the OCIO is a team-production enabler and the LOC and business-centric IT steering committee are mediating hierarchs (strategic and tactical, respectively), we extend the logic to suggest that a production focus and a mediating hierarch perspective can be substitutes for each other. Simply put, it appears that either approach can effectively wield the fee-for-service funding approach. By extension, our results indicate that the IT department simply needs direction and either group can provide it. The negative configurations also display good equifinality and have three configurations that lead to poor IT departmental performance. In the first negative configuration (Low 1), the presence of an LOC (acting as a mediating hierarch) but without the support of a business-centric IT steering committee, a fee-for-service funding model, and an independent OCIO, leads to poor IT department performance. In this case, the LOC may be operating as a mediating hierarch but lacks sufficient tactical knowledge across the technical and functional domains to establish effective parameters that balance all of the varied interests. Ultimately, its efforts to mediate the competing interests are simply overwhelmed by the bureaucracy that surrounds state government. That is, the mediating hierarch part of the role of the LOC simply becomes diluted as initiatives move toward implementation. In the second dominant negative configuration (Low 2), a business-centric IT steering committee, in the absence of an involved LOC, a fee-for-service funding model, and an independent OCIO, achieves poor IT departmental performance. Our analysis of this configuration parallels our analysis of Low 1: a strong but more tactically focused mediating hierarch (the business-centric IT steering committee) is not sufficient in the absence of the strategic mediating hierarch or without the feefor-service funding mechanism. While in Low 1 the message may get diluted, in this case, the business-centric IT steering committee acting alone simply may not be powerful enough to drive the implementation of initiatives that balance all the varied interests placing demands on the IT department, particularly when the IT department controls the funds for IT service delivery. A mediating hierarch may be needed at the higher level in order for the business-centric IT steering committee to successfully act at the tactical level. Logically this makes sense as a more tactical mediating hierarch would be more effective when paired with (and following) a more clearly established set of strategic and funding priorities that come from the LOC. Without

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1201

the control aspect of the fee-for-service funding model and the team-production focus of the independent OCIO, a business-centric IT steering committee acting in isolation would not lead to effective IT departmental performance. Finally, in the third negative configuration (Low 3), the existence of a fee-forservice funding model and the absence of an LOC, business-centric IT steering committee, and an independent OCIO, leads to negative IT departmental performance. We interpret this as follows: an effective control strategy (fee-for-service funding model) in the absence of effective mediation/oversight (LOC, businesscentric IT steering committee, and independent OCIO) is simply a wasted tool. That is, without direction on how to apply it, the fee-for-service funding model provides little clarity on how best to balance competing demands placed on the IT department or to constrain the IT department from pursuing internal priorities at the expense of other team members. Interpreting our positive and negative configurations together, state governments can take either of two paths (High 1 or 2) focusing on implementing the appropriate team production mechanisms or establishing the strategic and tactical mediating hierarch roles but either one needs a fee-for-service funding model to enforce the direction provided by the organization entities. This is the essence of the substitution argument presented previously. Further, as shown in Low 3, the use of a single governance mechanism alone, without the organization providing either a production focus (independent OCIO) or a mediating hierarch (LOC involvement and business-centric IT steering committee) is of little or no value. That is, the fee-for-service model requires the right set of hands to use it effectively and the OCIO or the LOC plus business-centric IT steering committee can provide this guidance. Finally, the one common factor in the three negative configurations was the absence of an independent CIO. In these cases, a CIO beholden to another team member negates the efforts of governance to effectively and equitably distribute resources among competing priorities. While our positive configurations confirm that the mediating hierarch proposed by legal agency theory can lead to positive agent outcomes, it is not the only configuration to lead to positive outcomes as we noted in our discussion on substitution. However, the negative configurations paint a much more striking picture: without the full mediating hierarch in effect (both the LOC at the strategic level and the business-centric IT steering committee at the tactical level), low outcomes may likely be experienced. That is, while the mediating hierarchs do not always lead to positive outcomes, lack of the combined tactical and strategic mediating hierarchs or the lack of an OCIO lead to low IT department performance. The only cases in which this is not true are when there is a robust set of governance mechanisms to ensure team production effectiveness. Thus, we conclude that, at the agent level, the mediating hierarch provided by the LOC plus business-centric steering committee or the production-enabling function of the OCIO are instrumental to achieving positive outcomes and avoiding negative outcomes.

1202

DAWSON ET AL.

State Performance—Principal Performance
Table 3 presents the crisp set analysis for state (principal) performance and displays strong unifinality for the positive outcome, which shows that only a single configuration achieves high state (principal) performance. Conversely, low state performance has solid equifinality with two configurations that lead to low state performance. The only configuration that leads to high state (principal) performance features an involved LOC (strategic mediating hierarch), business-centric IT steering committee (tactical mediating hierarch), and an independent OCIO (team production). Interestingly, fee-for-service funding, which features so prominently in high IT departmental performance, is not salient in high state performance. Rather, high state performance requires the participation of all of salient actors rather than the use of the fee-for-service mechanism. This suggests that, if the entire organization can be focused on achieving an overriding goal, there is no need for tools like fee-forservice funding models since the IT department is getting a clear and consistent mission from the rest of the organization (LOC plus business-centric IT steering committee plus independent OCIO). Both low state performance configurations are missing a part of the mediating hierarch (Low 1 missing business-centric IT steering committee and Low 2 missing involved LOC). While both low configurations still have the fee-for-service funding mechanism (and Low 2 also has a secondary condition of an independent OCIO), the absence of part of the mediating hierarch is central to low state performance. When coupled with the single high state performance configuration, it becomes clear that the

Table 3. State Information Performance Configurations High State Information Performance Configuration
LOC Involvement Business-centric IT Steering Committee Fee-for-Service Funding Model Independent OCIO Consistency Raw coverage Unique coverage Overall solution consistency Overall solution coverage 1.000 0.429 0.429 1.000 0.429 0.875 0.412 0.353 0.889 0.471 1.000 0.118 0.059

Low State Information Performance 1 2

1

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1203

full mediating hierarch operating at the strategic and tactical levels is important to achieving positive state (principal) outcomes as well as avoiding negative outcomes. A final point to note is that between high state and high IT performances, one configuration leads to both outcomes. That configuration includes the presence of all four legal agency theory predicted governance mechanisms—LOC involvement, business-centric IT steering committee, fee-for-service funding, and an independent OCIO—which is a subset of each of the three positive configurations identified. This strongly supports the application of legal agency theory in public sector governance research and suggests that decision makers need to invest in both mediating hierarch structures and team production-control mechanisms to achieve the most consistent and best outcomes for both principal and agent. Anything less will favor one over the other and may lead to negative outcomes for one or both.

Contributions, Limitations, and Conclusions
Our study makes several contributions to both theory and practice. First, we demonstrate that concepts of legal agency theory can be usefully adapted to and empirically supported in the public sector context. Legal agency theory was developed based on a reconsideration of agency theory in the private sector [37] and little empirical research has been done leveraging this theory. By adapting legal agency theory to the public sector, this study represents a shift in understanding public sector IT governance since it allows a reconceptualization of approaches to governance studies from the opportunistic/control-oriented classical agency theory to the goal alignment/PSM-based legal agency theory. This shifting of the theoretical lenses, supported by the empirical results of our configurational comparative analyses, demonstrates its value and opens broad new avenues to examine and better understand public sector IT governance. Second, we also find that while the actors are different in the public sector and the private sector (e.g., legislative oversight committee versus board of directors), some of the roles played by the actors have substantial parallels. This suggests, from a governance perspective, more theoretical commonalities exist between the public and private sectors than have been previously understood. We suspect that, as NPM continues to spread throughout the United States and Europe, these commonalities are likely to become more apparent. However, this should not be interpreted to mean that the governance mechanisms and the roles played by various actors are equivalent, but rather that there are interesting similarities as well as differences to explore. Third, we also find that if goal congruence in team production exists as predicted under legal agency theory, the actions taken by the mediating hierarch provide positive outcomes for both the principal (the state) and the agent (IT department). This is a novel finding that emerges in the shift from goal conflict and opportunism (under classical agency theory) to goal alignment and PSM (under legal agency theory). Fourth, we find that in achieving high IT department performance, the mediating hierarch (provided by the LOC plus business-centric IT steering committee) and the

1204

DAWSON ET AL.

production enablement (provided by the OCIO) may act as substitutes for each other in achieving high performance. In terms of operationalizing governance processes in practice, this suggests that it is not as important to emphasize who provides the direction to the IT department but just that clear and consistent direction is provided in terms of priorities. Fifth, this study shows the value of a configurational approach to highlight the commonalities and differences in achieving positive principal and agent outcomes. While correlations provided some evidence that relationships between various governance mechanisms and both principal and agent performance, the configurational approach highlighted the different configurations that led to successful and unsuccessful outcomes in each. For example, correlation would suggest that at the state performance (principal) level, LOC involvement alone would be sufficient to achieve positive outcomes and the absence of the same would be sufficient for negative outcomes. Our findings indicate that LOC involvement is critical, but only when combined with two other factors—an independent IT steering committee and an independent OCIO. We have similarly determined that LOC involvement can, but not necessarily must, be present in negative outcomes at the state level. As such, we uncover richness in the story using configurational analysis. These contributions raise the intriguing possibility of generalizability to other types of government within the United States (e.g., local and federal) as well as generalizability to other countries. Based on our research, we do not suggest that the LOC and business-centric IT steering committees are the only salient mediating hierarchs in other levels of government. However, given that they largely control resource allocation, similar entities may take on the roles of mediating hierarchs in other levels of government. Clearly, our findings are not relevant for authoritative, top-down government forms since resource distribution would be centralized to one group (from the top) and it is unlikely that any subordinate group would attempt to change it. But, for westernstyle governments, the set configurations of governance mechanisms embodied in legal agency theory are generalizable to other public sector contexts, particularly as NPM continues to spread, and offer fruitful opportunities for future research.

Limitations
As with all research studies, this current study has limitations. First, we note that the data were collected from secondary sources and therefore we controlled neither the specification of the variables nor the collection of the data. However, there is every reason to accept that the data within the data set are accurate due to the degree of quality control required for information in each state and due to the normative pressures exerted by NASCIO, Pew, and the CDG as trusted third parties. Second, we do not assert that the variables highlighted in the current study are the only elements that could potentially influence IT departmental performance and state performance. Other elements could potentially exist but were outside the scope of our study or not available in the secondary data. Third, this study was performed

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1205

using arm’s-length secondary data and it was not possible to confirm our interpretations with actors from that time period. However, this is offset by the breadth and completeness of the data, which are a substantial benefit of the study, and while the data are approximately 10 years old, we do not feel that they have lost any relevance to our research question over time. Finally, this study was conducted within the context of U.S.-state-level government. While we believe that elements of this study can be ported to other levels of government or countries, we did not have the data to test this belief, and we thus encourage this exploration for future researchers.

Conclusions
Our results show that legal agency theory can be applied to the public sector, although a key understanding of the actors is necessary. Although legal agency theory is not widely used in private sector studies of IT governance, it is clear that it has applicability within the public sector, and future research will need to determine if its constructs apply to the private sector. By better understanding that good governance does not have to be a zero-sum game in which either the principal wins and the agent loses or vice versa, an intellectual shift can be made to maximizing positive outcomes as opposed to simply trying to avoid negative outcomes. Given the size and the breadth of services offered by the state and the criticality of the services to the citizens, such a shift could have profound impacts on the quality of the lives of those whom governments serve.

Supplemental File
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher ’s website at http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2016.1267533

NOTES
1. An illustration of this can be found in the corruption trial of former Virginia governor, Bob McDonnell. 2. Sufficiency means that when a condition is present across cases, then the outcome must also be present, whereas necessity means that when the outcome is present, then the condition must also be present. INUS refers to insufficient but nonredundant parts of a condition that is itself unnecessary but sufficient for the occurrence of the effect. 3. We compared IT departmental performance between 2000 and 2006 and found no statistically significant differences (p = .618) in rankings. While some states did make minor changes to their approach to governance, the changes were too small and too infrequent to have any statistical impact. In addition, while longitudinal study of the phenomenon may be of interest, application of panel data analysis to QCA is in its infancy at the time of this study. 4. We compared IT departmental performance and state performance between states that had both a House and a Senate LOC with those that had only one and found no statistically significant differences (p = 0.528 for IT departmental performance and p = 0.841 for state performance). 5. We thank one of our anonymous reviewers who suggested this line of reasoning to us.

1206

DAWSON ET AL.

REFERENCES
1. Barrett, K., and Greene, R. The year of living dangerously. Governing Magazine, February 2005. Available at: http://www.governing.com/topics/economic-dev/Year-LivingDangerously.html 2. Berg-Scholsser, D., and De Meur, G. Qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) as an approach. In B. Rihoux and C.C. Ragin (eds.), Configurational Comparative Methods: Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) and Related Techniques. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2009, pp. 1–18. 3. Blair, M., and Stout, L. Corporate accountability: Director accountability and the mediating role of the corporate board. Washington Law Review, 79 (2001), 403–447. 4. Boh, W.F., and Yellin, D. Using enterprise architecture standards in managing information technology. Journal of Management Information Systems, 23, 3 (2006), 163–207. 5. Brewer, G.A., and Selden, S.C. Whistle blowers in the federal civil service: New evidence of the public service ethic. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 8, 3 (1998), 413–440. 6. Chatterjee, S.: Moody, G.: Lowry, P.B.: Chakraborty, S.: and Hardin, A. Strategic relevance of organizational virtues enabled by information technology in organizational innovation. Journal of Management Information Systems, 32, 3 (2015), 158–196. 7. Choudhary, V., and Vithayathil, J. The impact of cloud computing: Should the IT department be organized as a cost center or a profit center? Journal of Management Information Systems, 30, 2 (2013), 67–100. 8. CIOs, N.A.o.S. Compendium of Digital Government in the States. 2008. 9. Crewson, P.E. Public-service motivation: Building empirical evidence of incidence and effect. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 7, 4 (1997), 499–518. 10. Daily, C.M.: Dalton, D.R.: and Cannella, A.A. Corporate governance: Decades of dialogue and data. Academy of Management Review, 28, 3 (2003), 371–382. 11. Dalton, D.R.: Daily, C.M.: Certo, S.T.: and Roengpitya, R. Meta-analyses of financial performance and equity: Fusion or confusion. Academy of Management Journal, 46 (2003), 13–26. 12. Dalton, D.R.: Hitt, M.A.: Certo, S.T.: and Dalton, C.M. The fundamental agency problem and its mitigation: Independence, equity, and the market for corporate control. Academy of Management Annals, 1 (2007), 1–64. 13. Dawson, G.S.: Denford, J.S.: and Desouza, K.C. Governing innovation in U.S. state government: An ecosystem perspective. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 25, 4 (2016), 299–318. 14. Dawson, G.S.: Kauffman, R.: and Ho, M.W. How are C-suite executives different? A comparative empirical study of the survival of American chief information officers. Decision Support Systems, 74 (2015), 88–101. 15. De Haes, S., and Van Grembergen, W. An exploratory study into IT governance implementations and its impact on business/IT alignment. Information Systems Management, 26, 2 (2009), 123–137. 16. Donaldson, L., and Davis, J.H. Stewardship theory or agency theory: CEO governance and shareholder returns. Australian Journal of Management, 16, 1 (1991), 49–64. 17. Doucouliagos, C. A note on the evolution of homo economicus. Journal of Economic Issues, 28, 3 (1994), 877–883. 18. Earl, M.J. Experiences in strategic information systems planning. MIS Quarterly, 17, 1 (1993), 1–25. 19. Eisenhardt, K. Agency theory: An assessment and review. Academy of Management Review, 14, 1 (1989), 57–75. 20. Etzioni, A. Comparative Analysis of Complex Organizations. Rev. Ed. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster, 1975. 21. Fama, E.F., and Jensen, M.C. Separation of ownership and control. Journal of Law and Economics, 26, 2 (1983), 301–327. 22. Fichman, R.G. Going beyond the dominant paradigm for information technology innovation research: Emerging concepts and methods. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 5, 8 (2004), 314–355.

IT GOVERNANCE USING THE LEGAL VIEW OF AGENCY THEORY

1207

23. Fiss, P.C. Building better causal theories: A fuzzy set approach to typologies in organizational research. Academy of Management Journal, 54, 2 (2011), 393–420. 24. Fiss, P.C. A set-theoretic approach to organizational configurations. Academy of Management Review, 32, 4 (2007), 1180–1198. 25. Frank, R.H. Microeconomics and Behavior. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994. 26. Government, C.f.D. Digital States Survey, 2006. Center for Digital Government, 2006. 27. Hirsch, P.: Michaels, S.: and Friedman, R. “Dirty hands” versus “clean models”. Theory and Society, 16 (1987), 317–336. 28. Huber, T.L.: Fischer, T.A.: Dibbern, J.: and Hirschheim, R. A process model of complementarity and substitution of contractual and relational governance in IS outsourcing. Journal of Management Information Systems, 30, 3 (2013), 81–114. 29. Institute, I.G. Board briefing on IT governance. 2003. 30. Jensen, M.C., and Meckling, W.H. Self-interest, altruism, incentives, and agency theory. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 7, 2 (1994), 40–45. 31. Jensen, M.C., and Meckling, W.H. Theory of the firm: Managerial behaviour, agency costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3 (1976), 305–360. 32. Jewer, J., and McKay, K.N. Antecedents and consequences of board IT governance: Institutional and strategic choice perspectives. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 13, 7 (2012), 581–617. 33. Kankanhalli, A., and Kohli, R. Does public or private sector matter? An agenda for IS research in E-government. PACIS 2009, Hyderabad, India, July 10–12, 2009. 34. Karahanna, E., and Preston, D.S. The effect of social capital of the relationship between the CIO and top management team on firm performance. Journal of Management Information Systems, 30, 1 (2013), 15–56. 35. Karimi, J.: Bhattacherjee, A.: Gupta, Y.P.: and Somers, T.M. The effects of MIS steering committees on information technology management sophistication. Journal of Management Information Systems, 17, 2 (2000), 207–230. 36. Kenworthy, L., and Hicks, A. Method and Substance in Macrocomparative Analysis. New York, NY: Palgrave Mcmillan, 2008. 37. Lan, L.L., and Heracleous, L. Rethinking agency theory: The view from law. Academy of Management Review, 35, 2 (2010), 294–314. 38. Maryland, S.o. Maryland State Archives: Joint Information Technology and Biotechnology Committee. 2013. 39. Mitsuhashi, H.: Shane, S.: and Sine, W.D. Organization governance form in franchising: Efficient contracting or organizational momentum. Strategic Management Journal, 29 (2008), 1127–1136. 40. Moynihan, D.P., and Pandey, S.K. The role of organizations in fostering public service motivation. Public Administration Review, 67, 1 (2007), 40–53. 41. Naff, K.C., and Crum, J. Working for America: Does public service motivation make a difference? Review of Public Personnel Administration, 19, 4 (1999), 5–16. 42. Ni, A.Y., and Ho, A.T.-K. Challenges in e-government development: Lessons from two information kiosk projects. Government Information Quarterly, 22, 1 (2005), 58–74. 43. Pang, M.-S. IT governance and business value in the public sector operations: The role of elected representatives in IT governance and its impact on IT value in US state governments. Decision Support Systems, 59 (2014), 274–285. 44. Pang, M.-S.: Tafti, A.: and Krishnan, M. Do CIO IT budgets explain bigger or smaller governments? Theory and evidence from US state governments. Management Science, 62, 4 (2015), 1020–1041. 45. Pee, L.G., and Kankanhalli, A. Knowledge management capability: A resource-based comparison of public and private organizations. Paper presented at ICIS 2009, Phoenix, AZ, December 15–18, 2009. 46. Perry, J.L. and Wise, L.R. The motivational bases of public service. Public Administration Review, 50, 3 (1990), 367–373. 47. Peterson, R.R. Information strategies and tactics for information technology governance. In W.V. Grembergen (ed.), Strategies for Information Technology Governance. Hershey, PA: Idea Publishing Group, 2003, pp. 37–80.

1208

DAWSON ET AL.

48. Ragin, C.C. Fuzzy-Set Social Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. 49. Ragin, C.C. Redesigning Social Inquiry: Fuzzy Sets and Beyond. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008. 50. Ragin, C.C., and Davey, S. fa/QCA. Irvine: University of California Press, 2009. 51. Ragin, C.C., and Fiss, P.C. Net effects analysis versus configurational analysis: An empirical demonstration. In C.C. Ragin (ed.), Redesigning Social Inquiry: Fuzzy Sets and Beyond. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008, pp. 190–212. 52. Ragin, C.C., and Rihoux, B. Qualitative comparative analysis (QCA): State of the art and prospects. Qualitative Methods: Newsletter of the American Political Science Association Organization Section on Qualitative Methods, 2, 2 (2004), 3–13. 53. Rainey, H.G. Understanding and Managing Public Organizations. Wiley, 2009. 54. Rihoux, B., and De Meur, G. Crisp-set qualitative comparative analyses (csQCA). In B. Rihous and C.C. Ragin (eds.), Configurational Comparative Methods: Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) and Related Techniques. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2009, pp. 33–68. 55. Tiwana, A. Governance-knowledge fit in systems development projects. Information Systems Research, 20, 2 (2009), 180–197. 56. Van Grembergen, W.: De Haes, S.: and Guldentops, E. Structures, Processes and Relational Mechanisms for Information Technology Governance: Theories and Practices. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing, 2004. 57. Vis, B. The comparative advantages of fsQCA and regression analysis for moderately large-n analyses. Sociological Methods and Research, 41, 1 (2012), 168–198. 58. Weill, P. Don’t just lead, govern: How top-performing firms govern IT. MIS Quarterly Executive, 3 (2004), 1–17. 59. Weill, P., and Ross, J.W. IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decision Rights for Superior Results. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2004. 60. Wright, B.E. Public-sector work motivation: A review of the current literature and a revised conceptual model. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 11, 4 (2001), 559–586. 61. Wu, S.P.-J.: Straub, D.W.: and Liang, T.-P. How information technology governance mechanisms and strategic alignment influence organizational performance: Insights from a matched survey of business and IT managers. MIS Quarterly, 39, 2 (2015), 497–518.

