© 2016 JIT Palgrave Macmillan All rights reserved 0268-3962/16
palgrave-journals.com/jit/

Journal of Information Technology (2016) 31, 48–66

Research article

The effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes: establishing a dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types
Andreas Eckhardt1, Sven Laumer2, Christian Maier2, Tim Weitzel2
1 Institute for Information Systems, Centre of Human Resources Information Systems, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany; 2 Department for Information Systems and Services, Centre of Human Resources Information Systems, Otto-Friedrich University of Bamberg, Germany, Bamberg, Germany

Correspondence: A Eckhardt, Institute for Information Systems, Centre of Human Resources Information Systems, Goethe University Frankfurt, Grueneburgplatz 1, Frankfurt 60323, Germany. Tel: +49 69 7983 4005; Fax: +49 69 7983 3910; E-mail: eckhardt@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de

Abstract Research on IT personnel has observed that the major predictors for turnover intention are job satisfaction and organizational commitment. However, less is known about how these predictors are determined and how they vary according to the different job types of IT personnel. Hence, we develop and evaluate a dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types as the ﬁrst approach in IT turnover research combining the personality traits of the ﬁve-factor model and the basic turnover model found among Western IS professionals into one research model. By the help of the model we analyze the role of personality in IT personnel turnover across four groups of IT roles: consultants, programmers, system engineers, and system administrators. The results of an empirical analysis of 813 IT personnel reveal signiﬁcant differences across the four groups in terms of personality and job-related attitudes. In terms of personality traits, system engineers rank highest in openness and conscientiousness, IT consultants in extraversion, programmers in neuroticism, and system administrators in agreeableness. In 50% of all cases, personality traits are signiﬁcant predictors for job-related attitudes. Additionally, they indirectly affect IT personnel turnover intention. Neuroticism, extraversion, and conscientiousness are also important indirect predictors for turnover intention, whereas openness has only a weak effect and agreeableness no measurable effect. Journal of Information Technology (2016) 31, 48–66. doi:10.1057/jit.2014.27; published online 16 December 2014 Keywords: IT workforce; personality; IT job type; job-related attitude; turnover intention; big ﬁve Introduction Put talent into your ﬁrm, but your genius into ﬁnding the talent. (Weitzel et al., 2009) task for executives outside and inside the IT sector. However, the ongoing supply of IT talent for major organizations is getting more and more scanty due to the global demographic shift, shrinking enrollments in Information Systems (IS) degree program, and the challenge of IT personnel turnover (Hirschheim and Newman, 2010; Laumer et al., 2011). IT turnover is faced in almost every industry and organization

S

teadily attracting and recruiting new Information Technology (IT) talent is both a particular need for the longterm success of organizations as well as an important

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

49

across the globe and represents a major long-term challenge for employers and recruiters (Gupta, 2001; Carayon et al., 2006; Luftman and Kempaiah, 2008). Besides being a challenge due to the temporary nature of IT (project) work and workers leaving the IT profession, IT personnel turnover is also a sign of a well-functioning labor market where scant talent is rewarded. However, this wide range of external opportunities for IT workers severely threatens organizations as high turnover rates have been associated with decreased customer satisfaction, productivity, revenue growth, and profitability (Joseph et al., 2007). Additionally, the loss of IT personnel due to turnover not only decreases the number of workers available for projects but also leads to a loss of specialized skills, tacit knowledge, and understanding of speciﬁc business operations (Moore and Burke, 2002; Moore and Love, 2005). To support practitioners in managing the challenge of IT turnover, more than 30 IS research studies over the last 20 years have focused on IT personnel turnover using common models found in general management literature (Joseph et al., 2007). However, these studies are limited because they implicitly assume that IT employees are a homogeneous group (Prasad et al., 2007; Lo and Riemenschneider, 2011), neglecting potential differences in personality or IT job type. To overcome this shortcoming, we take a positivistic deductive research approach to develop a theory-based dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types, observing the impact of personality traits on IT workers’ jobrelated attitudes. The research model is evaluated with data gathered from a survey of 813 IT employees of four different job types (101 IT consultants, 293 programmers, 154 system engineers and 265 system administrators), following the classiﬁcation scheme developed by Lo and Riemenschneider (2011). We base our model on the assumption that dispositional and situational factors impact job-related attitudes like job satisfaction and turnover intention among IT employees differently depending on their exact job type (Staw et al., 1986; Wynekoop and Walz, 1998; Zimmerman, 2008). Despite the advice that ‘researchers need to consider whether some individuals have a propensity to quit regardless of having a work environment designed to increase their job satisfaction’ (Zimmerman, 2008: 310), with the exception of Lounsbury et al. (2007), who observe the impact of broader and narrower personality traits on IT personnel’s job and career satisfaction, no research has been published on IT personnel turnover that enhances our understanding of the complex dispositional factors that lead to the turnover of IT personnel. To ﬁll this research gap, the ﬁrst purpose of this study is to evaluate the inﬂuence of personality on IT personnel turnover by addressing the following research question (RQ): RQ1: How does personality inﬂuence IT personnel’s job attitudes and turnover intentions? Beside the aspect of personality, prior IT turnover studies also did not take IT personnel’s job type into account (Lo and Riemenschneider, 2011; Lo, 2013). In this context, Enns et al. (2006) suggest that IT employee motivations to remain in a company are far more complex than the stereotypical image of IT personnel. Hence, the motivational factors of IT employees to remain at their employer might differ signiﬁcantly across IT job types. This is explicitly analyzed by Lo and Riemenschneider (2011), who show that IT employees do in

fact diverge according to job type. They provide evidence for different motivational factors based on organizational support theory for technically and non-technically orientated employees. They conclude that combining all IT personnel together into one category might obscure some of the unique insights about these employees that can be used to strengthen the bond between the organization and its employees and to enhance existing literature on IT personnel turnover. Since IT employees in different job functions have motivational (Igbaria and Siegel, 1992; Lo and Riemenschneider, 2011) and personality differences (Wynekoop and Walz, 1998), they might also be likely to have attitudinal differences regarding their employment. By better understanding the differences that drive these attitudes for various job types, employers can optimize their strategies to retain or recruit their valued IT employees. Hence, to explore potential variations among IT employees with different job types based on their personality as indicated by Wynekoop and Walz (1998) and their inﬂuence on job attitudes, our second research question is: RQ2: Does the IT job type affect how IT personnel’s personality inﬂuences their job attitudes and turnover intentions? We contribute to current research by developing and evaluating a dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types as the ﬁrst approach in IT turnover research combining the personality traits of the ﬁve-factor model (McCrae and Costa, 2006) – openness to experience, extraversion, neuroticism, agreeableness, and conscientiousness – to the basic constructs of IT turnover (Lacity et al., 2008) – job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and turnover intention – into one research model. As prior research indicated that IT personnel vary in terms of their attitudes and behavior depending on their job type (Lo and Riemenschneider, 2011), we analyze the impact for four different groups of IT professionals – IT consultants, programmers, system engineers, and system administrators. To outline and explain the contribution of this research, the remainder of this paper attempts to answer these two research questions. In the next section, the theoretical background of IT personnel turnover and the impact of IT job type and personality traits on the turnover decision are presented. The subsequent section describes our hypothesized dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types, which will be evaluated using data collected in a survey of 851 IT professionals. In the ﬁnal section, the theoretical and practical implications of our results are discussed.

Theoretical background and model development The general purpose of this study is to explore and analyze how a range of different personality factors inﬂuence jobrelated attitudes across different IT job types. IT personnel are a diverse group (Prasad et al., 2007; Lo and Riemenschneider, 2011) that can be differentiated by personality (Wynekoop and Walz, 1998), among other factors. We will ﬁrst sum up prior research on IT personnel turnover for explaining the impact of personality on job-related attitudes such as job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and turnover intention.

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

50

IT personnel turnover In 2007, Joseph et al. discuss the turnover intention of IT personnel, providing a narrative review of the relevant literature. They conclude their study with a contextual model of IT personnel turnover which integrates both the individual and the cross-over level of analysis of turnover intention and behavior. Based on Joseph et al.’s (2007) literature review, this section highlights the fundamentals of IT turnover intention and its major determinants. In general, studies on IT turnover intention include several different theories and models, such as the theory of organizational equilibrium (March and Simon, 1958), the linkage model (Mobley et al., 1978), and the unfolding model of turnover (Lee and Mitchell, 1994). They have been conducted in several situational contexts such as in before, during, and after an economic downturn (Laumer and Eckhardt, 2010; Laumer et al., 2011), as well as for different professions and educational backgrounds (Laumer et al., 2012). Similar to IS adoption scenarios (Eckhardt et al., 2009) turnover decisions are strongly inﬂuenced by several inﬂuencing factors on the individual, ﬁrm and environmental level (Joseph et al., 2007; Maier et al., 2013), as illustrated by the following example. If an employee wants to quit her current job because she is not satisﬁed with her job, job-related factors such as job satisfaction and organizational commitment are low but this does not necessarily mean that she will actually quit. She might only quit if there are a sufﬁcient number of job alternatives available on the labor market. But nevertheless, job satisfaction is one of the major constructs in turnover research (Joseph et al., 2007). It refers to the degree to which employees enjoy working in their job (Hoppcock, 1935) and is strongly related to the individual characteristics of the particular job in the IT environment (Ang and Slaughter, 2004; Harrison et al., 2006). The degree of autonomy and constant rewarding by superiors fosters job satisfaction, while a perceived higher pay for peers could reduce it (Igbaria and Greenhaus, 1992). In addition to job satisfaction, organizational commitment is another mediator for the way job characteristics inﬂuence turnover intention (Thatcher et al., 2002). Organizational commitment is deﬁned as ‘enduring feelings about shared norms and individuals’ willingness to exert effort on behalf of the organization’ (Thatcher et al., 2002). Organizational commitment could be classiﬁed in different ways (Meyer and Allen, 1991). Within our investigation, we observe organizational commitment in terms of affective and normative commitment. Affective commitment describes ‘the strength of an individual’s identiﬁcation with and involvement in a particular organization’ (Porter et al., 1974: 604). Normative commitment indicates a willingness to remain with an employer due to a sense of moral obligation (Wiener, 1982). Turnover intention is the strongest cognitive precursor of turnover (Lee and Mowday, 1987). Job satisfaction and organizational commitment are the two major antecedents of IT personnel turnover intention, which is why these three constructs and their interrelationships are called the ‘basic turnover model found among Western IS professionals’ (Lacity et al., 2008) and will be used as the underlying IT turnover model for examining the inﬂuence of IT personnel’s personality and job type on their turnover (Figure 1).

Figure 1 Basic turnover model found among Western IS professionals (Lacity et al., 2008).

IT job type and IT personnel turnover While there is scant research regarding different job types in the IT turnover literature, Ahuja et al. (2007) believe that it would be beneﬁcial to speciﬁcally investigate special types of IT personnel, such as the IT road warrior, that is those IT personnel spending most of their work week away from home at a client site. This runs parallel to research by Lo and Riemenschneider (2011), who assume that variations in IT personnel’s job-related attitudes could be explained by their job type, and Ang and Slaughter (2004), who ﬁnd that technically and non-technically oriented employees are different with regard to the factors that motivate them. Variations could also be explained by individuals’ personalities. McAdams (1996) provides a three-tiered framework for understanding what kind of employee an IT worker is. Level one captures an individual’s biologically based predispositions (McCrae and Costa, 2006). These predispositions are deﬁned as traits that depict constant patterns of thoughts, feelings and behaviors in diverse situations that distinguish individuals from each other (McCrae and Costa, 2006). The second level within McAdams framework includes characteristic adaptations capturing an individual’s goals, strivingsm and concerns (Emmons, 1986). The last level includes life narratives reﬂecting an individual’s development over time. Thus, we focus on the big ﬁve personality traits (McCrae and Costa, 2006) on level one, on job satisfaction and organizational commitment as personal concerns on level two, and on turnover intention as a predictor of an individual’s behavior in the future on level three. In terms of different job types for the IT profession, Wynekoop and Walz (1998) examine three types of IT personnel (programmers, system analysts, and project managers) and show that these groups of IT personnel differ among each other but also compared with the general population with regard to their personalities. Compared with programmers, project managers and system analysts are more conservative, logical, analytical, diligent, and ambitious, with strong leadership tendencies, high self-conﬁdence, and selfesteem. Lo and Riemenschneider’s (2011) ﬁndings are similar in that they observe varying impacts of stressors, supervisor

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

51

relationship, compensation, and accommodations on perceived organizational support for different IT job types (i.e., system analysts, system architects/engineers, IT management, programmers, and IT project leads). With regard to the actual turnover decision, in a survey of 464 IT employees, Igbaria and Siegel (1992) ﬁnd that managers are the least likely to leave the organization, while project leaders and software engineers are the most likely to leave. Their results were partially conﬁrmed by a study by Tan and Igbaria (1994), which revealed that software professionals have the highest tendency to leave their employer, while IT personnel in managerial positions have the lowest tendency to leave. The results of these studies indicate the importance of studying the group of IT personnel differently in terms of their job type. Hence, within this work, we observe the impact of personality on job-related attitudes and turnover intentions across the different IT job types of IT consultants, programmers, system engineers, and system administrators and hypothesize that: Hypothesis 1: The impact of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes and turnover intentions varies across different IT job types.

Personality and IT personnel turnover In recent years, there has been growing interest in psychology and general management research in investigating the relationship between personality traits and job and career satisfaction. In a comprehensive meta-analysis of the majority of this research, Salgado (2002) identiﬁes a strong relationship between personality and turnover. However, with regard to approaches to researching IT personnel turnover, only Lounsbury et al. (2007) discuss how personality traits might inﬂuence IT personnel’s job and career satisfaction. They ﬁnd that emotional resilience, extraversion, openness to experience, team disposition, assertiveness, customer service orientation, optimism, and work drive are related with job satisfaction as well as career satisfaction. In contrast to Lounsbury et al. (2007), who observe the inﬂuence of ﬁve broader traits and ﬁve traits narrower in

conceptual scope (assertiveness, image management, optimism, tough-mindedness, and work drive) for job and career satisfaction for an unspeciﬁed group of IT professionals, we analyze the impact of the personality traits of the ﬁve-factor model (McCrae and Costa, 2006) – openness to experience, extraversion, neuroticism, agreeableness, and conscientiousness – on job-related attitudes as well as on turnover intentions for four different groups of IT personnel (IT consultants, programmers, system engineers, system administrators). To formulate directional hypotheses for the impact of the dispositional traits on job-related attitudes, we base our research model on Holland’s vocational theory (Holland, 1996). Holland’s central thesis is that ‘people ﬂourish in their work environment when there is a good ﬁt between their personality type and the characteristics of the environment. Lack of congruence between personality and environment leads to dissatisfaction’ (Holland, 1996: 397). Given personalities differences among IT personnel depending on their job types (Wynekoop and Walz, 1998), one would expect relationships between personality and job-related attitudes (Lounsbury et al., 2007) as well as turnover intention (Zimmerman, 2008). The above hypothesis combines an employee’s predisposition with personal concerns such as job satisfaction or organizational concerns to explain human anticipation of the own job future. All hypotheses of the dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types (see Figure 2) for all ﬁve traits observed (openness to experience, extraversion, neuroticism, agreeableness, and conscientiousness) will be explained with a brief rationale for each trait in the following subsections. Openness to experience Openness refers to ‘receptivity to change, learning and new experiences’ (Lounsbury et al., 2007: 175) that might positively inﬂuence both vocational and job satisfaction. In the learning context, Gallivan (2004) shows that job satisfaction of IT personnel is positively related to their openness to experience. Individuals who are very open to experience will also have a higher commitment to the company’s objectives and will

Figure 2 Dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types.

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

52

actively pursue them. In this context, Hurtz and Donovan (2000) ﬁnd that open-minded employees have a stronger identiﬁcation with their employer than less open-minded ones. As employees scoring high on openness also have a frequent need for communication, they participate more often in decision-making processes, which gives them a voice in the organization and allows them to feel that they are being taken seriously while strengthening their identiﬁcation and role (Smidts et al., 2001). Hence we expect that the stronger an IT worker’s openness and need for communication, the stronger she identiﬁes with the organization (Trombetta and Rogers, 1988; Guzley, 1992). A positive communication climate will strengthen organizational identiﬁcation because it is rewarding and thus serves IT personnel’s self-enhancement. Hence, we assume that: Hypothesis 2a: The higher an IT worker’s openness to experience, the higher her job satisfaction. Hypothesis 3a: The higher an IT worker’s openness to experience, the higher her organizational commitment. In discussing the motivational factors inﬂuencing voluntary turnover, Maertz and Griffeth (2004) suggest that those individuals high in openness to experience would value changing jobs and would therefore be more likely to leave an organization. Individuals high in openness approach turnover from a more positive point of view undervaluing their jobrelated attitudes. Thus, they are more likely to leave the organization for exploring new opportunities, regardless of how they feel about their job (Zimmerman, 2008). Therefore, we hypothesize that: Hypothesis 4a: The higher an IT worker’s openness to experience, the higher her turnover intention. Extraversion Individuals high in extraversion tend to experience positive emotions more frequently than those lower in this trait (Clark and Watson, 1999). Consequently, Maertz and Griffeth (2004) note in their discussion of affective motivational factors inﬂuencing voluntary turnover, employees who feel better about their work environment have higher job satisfaction. Interpersonal and communication skills are identiﬁed as critical factors for IT personnel’s individual satisfaction (Lee et al., 1995). These skills include the extraversion-related activities of ‘expressing one’s ideas and views, communicating readily in group settings, taking the initiative for interaction in leaderless discussion groups, forming positive relationships and networking, displaying interpersonal warmth, joining groups and associations, and facilitating meetings and discussions’ (Lounsbury et al., 2007: 175). However, researchers also uncovered that in the speciﬁcity of some group-working scenarios, introverts are perceived to be more inﬂuencing for group’s decisions and their social respectability in the group is higher than those of extroverts (Bendersky and Shah, 2013). This could be explained by extroverts’ self-interested objectives leading peers to interpret extroverts’ behaviors as attempts to self-aggrandize through a work group’s task rather than to beneﬁt the overall group objective (Ridgeway, 1982; Fu et al., 2010; Bendersky and Shah, 2013). Extraversion is also an important foundation and driver for the concept of career anchors, which are strongly related to an IT professional’s job

satisfaction (Jiang et al., 2001). Career anchors represent an individual’s self-perception of her talents and abilities, needs and motives, as well as job-related attitudes and values that are established at certain levels (Schein, 1978; Chang et al., 2012). Based on these anchors, individuals have different wants on certain levels of their career. The closer the match between organizational provision to fulﬁll these needs and the individual want, the higher the job satisfaction (Irving and Meyer, 1999; Chang et al., 2012). In terms of organizational commitment, affective commitment represents an employee’s positive emotional reaction to the organization and positive emotionality is at the core of extraversion (McCrae and Costa, 2006). It is reasonable to assume that those high in extraversion should experience higher commitment than those who are less extroverted, although introverts sometimes are perceived to be more inﬂuencing and respected in some work groups (Bendersky and Shah, 2013). In fact, studies have found signiﬁcant bivariate correlations between positive emotionality and affective commitment in the expected positive direction (Erdheim et al., 2006). Regarding normative organizational commitment, which develops from an organization’s investments in their personnel (Meyer and Allen, 1991), individuals will feel indebted to their employer based on their psychological contract with their employer to reciprocate the organization’s initiatives. Hence, extroverted employees may seek out more social interactions within the workplace and ﬁnd these interactions more rewarding than introverts (Watson and Clark, 1997), if both parties fulﬁll the psychological contract (Erdheim et al., 2006). Hence, we hypothesize: Hypothesis 2b: The higher an IT worker’s extraversion, the higher her job satisfaction. Hypothesis 3b: The higher an IT worker’s extraversion, the higher her organizational commitment. Although a potential positive inﬂuence of the trait extraversion on job satisfaction and organizational commitment would consequently lead to lower turnover, we assume for extroverted IT personnel the reverse case. Some recent research emphasizes the dark sides of extraversion and challenges the persistence of extroverts’ advantage in task group status hierarchies (Hogan and Hogan, 2001; Judge et al., 2009). For example, Bendersky and Shah (2013) uncover that extraversion could be associated with status losses and disappointing expectations for contributions to group tasks. As actual contributions to a group’s task are an important basis for future collocation of groups, some extroverts might consider to leave these groups and their respective employer to gather better status and rewards elsewhere (Bendersky and Shah, 2013). The higher turnover intention could also be explained in the way that extroverts have a distinct need for social activities and a high interaction rate (Costa and McCrae, 1992). Owing to this need of frequent interaction, they are able to build up networks with employees of other organizations quickly (Zimmerman, 2008). Especially, those individuals high in extraversion are also more likely to perceive a larger number of alternate employment opportunities, making turnover more likely (March and Simon, 1958). Consequently, we assume that: Hypothesis 4b: The higher an IT worker’s extraversion, the higher her turnover intention.

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

53

Neuroticism Neuroticism, a personality trait that is measured in almost every personality survey (Judge et al., 1999), expresses one’s tendency to experience negative effects and thereby an absence of emotional stability. Neurotic people are described as anxious, hostile, depressed, self-conscious, impulsive, vulnerable, stressful, impatient, cynical, angry, take less risk, and have a negative attitude (Barrick and Mount, 1991). Because of their negative nature, neurotic individuals experience more negative life events than others (Magnus et al., 1993), although some research uncovers that in some scenarios neuroticism could also be associated to status gains in working groups due to surpassing expectations for group-task contributions (Bendersky and Shah, 2013). But nevertheless neurotics put themselves into situations that drive negative affect and emotions (Emmons et al., 1985). As these situations appear quite often in their work life, they would lead to lower levels of job satisfaction and organizational commitment (Judge et al., 2001). Therefore, we assume that: Hypothesis 2c: The higher an IT worker’s neuroticism, the lower her job satisfaction. Hypothesis 3c: The higher an IT worker’s neuroticism, the lower her organizational commitment. Research on the bright sides of neuroticism challenges the persistence of neurotics’ disadvantage in task group status hierarchies (Tamir, 2005; Le et al., 2011) and shows that neurotics could gain higher status in working groups due to surpassing expectations about their contributions for overall group objectives (Bendersky and Shah, 2013). Hence, neurotics more tend to stay at their employer not only because they are anxious and take less risk but also because they are more respected in some working groups than colleagues with differing personality traits. Furthermore, neurotic IT personnel endure stress in having to learn and to perform new responsibilities and the fear of the costs associated with leaving their current position lowers their turnover intention (Meyer and Allen, 1997; Ilies and Judge, 2002). The neurotic employee also feels apprehensive about having to become socialized into a new work environment that could provide even harsher experiences (Erdheim et al., 2006). Therefore, we hypothesize: Hypothesis 4c: The higher an IT worker’s neuroticism, the lower her turnover intention. Agreeableness Agreeableness is the interpersonal tendency to be cooperative, trusting, and altruistic. Agreeable people are straightforward, altruistic, friendly, warm, trusting others, selﬂess, generous, and are less suspicious than disagreeable people (Costa and McCrae, 1992). Owing to their tendency to establish positive and satisfying relationships with people in their organization, agreeable IT personnel are apt to think positively of their work environment (Organ and Lingl, 1995). Consequentially, we argue that: Hypothesis 2d: The higher an IT worker’s agreeableness, the higher her job satisfaction. Hypothesis 3d: The higher an IT worker’s agreeableness, the higher her organizational commitment.

According to Meyer and Allen (1991), positive relationships increase the strength of the affective factors that motivate individuals to stay at their jobs. In addition, due to the interpersonal aspects of agreeableness those individuals with high agreeableness are more likely to have successful relationships with others (McCrae and Costa, 1991; Organ and Lingl, 1995), and the compliance and dependence aspect are likely to cause employees high in agreeableness to perceive contractual obligations to stay with the organization (Maertz and Griffeth, 2004). Therefore, we assume: Hypothesis 4d: The higher an IT worker’s agreeableness, the lower her turnover intention. Conscientiousness Individuals with a high score on conscientiousness operate responsibly and prudently (Barrick and Mount, 1991). Such responsible and prudent employees show a distinct higher task performance as well as commitment with the employer’s objectives (Hurtz and Donovan, 2000). As discussed by Maertz and colleagues (Maertz and Campion, 2004; Maertz and Griffeth, 2004), conscientiousness inﬂuences the contractual and moral motivational factors that affect turnover. So we derive the following hypotheses: Hypothesis 2e: The higher an IT worker’s conscientiousness, the higher her job satisfaction. Hypothesis 3e: The higher an IT worker’s conscientiousness, the higher her organizational commitment. Further, those scoring higher in conscientiousness are more likely to believe contractual obligations exist and are more likely to adhere to them (Eisenberger et al., 2001). In addition, based on the unfolding model of turnover by Lee and Mitchell (1994), quitting a job spontaneously is inconsistent with the planning and impulse-control aspects of conscientious individuals (Maertz and Campion, 2004). Therefore, we hypothesize that: Hypothesis 4e: The higher an IT worker’s conscientiousness, the lower her turnover intention. Research model The newly hypothesized relationships are presented in the dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types (see Figure 2). Compared with Lacity et al. (2008), we excluded the inﬂuence of job satisfaction on organizational commitment, as it has been proven several times in prior research on IT turnover (see Joseph et al., 2007) and the focus of our approach is to observe the effect of the ﬁve-factor model (McCrae and Costa, 2006) on job-related attitudes and turnover intention across IT job types. Following the introduction of the model and the related hypotheses, we explain how we evaluated the model within the next section. Analysis To evaluate our research model using IT personnel data, we set up an online questionnaire in 2012. To measure job-related attitudes and personality we used items that have already been used in prior research (see section: Measures). We tested the items in a two-step process. After a ﬁrst test with students in

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

54

our IS department, we reﬁned the questionnaire through interviews with IT personnel to ensure content validity. We distributed the link to our online questionnaire via the global operating online job board Monster.com. With more than 300,000 registered IT workers across the globe and 1.5 million page visits by IT workers every month according to the job board, Monster.com is one of the largest job boards for IT workers worldwide. As we want to include different groups of IT personnel from IT and non-IT ﬁrms, and different areas of the IT sector, this approach seemed to be the most appropriate one to reach as many as possible individuals of this group. For our approach we invited all registered IT workers in Germany (7500 in total) to participate in a major study on the national IT labor market using an e-mail invitation containing a link to the online survey. To enhance participation in our study, we rafﬂed off three iPads among the participants. All questionnaire items for IT personnel’s job-related attitudes and turnover intention as well as the ﬁve-factor model are shown in Tables 1 and 2. Group classiﬁcation and demographics To test for the moderating effect of IT job type, we passed through a multi-step coding process. First all authors screened job ads for IT personnel listed at monster.com and noted the requirements and job description for each proﬁle. For guidance we used Igbaria and Siegel’s (1992), Wynekoop and Walz’s (1998) as well as Lo and Riemenschneider’s (2011) categorization of IT job types. This coding process resulted in 30 initial job categories, which are listed in Table A7. In a next step, all authors discussed and compared the initial job categories by the requirements and job description for each proﬁle. Similar or identical requirements were classiﬁed in one broad IT job type. Based on the coding scheme the categories were consolidated into four broader job types (see Table A7). These broader job types are IT consultants, programmers, system engineers, and system administrators. This consolidation was performed to achieve sample sizes large enough for individual group analysis while maintaining logical distinction. The 10 most frequent job requirements and descriptions were counted for each broader job type in order to describe the four IT job types observed and to help participants classify their own IT job proﬁle into one of the four broad job types. Table A8 provides an overview on all tasks and requirements and their afﬁliation to the four IT job types of IT consultants, programmers, system engineers, and system administrators. These descriptions were provided within a text passage that every participant had to read before starting to answer the questionnaire. After the participant assigned her current position to one of the four job types, or none of them, she was linked to the questions of the online questionnaire. In total, 882 individuals ﬁlled out our online questionnaire, including 30 participants who work in another IT job proﬁle. Those were predominately managerial-related ones, such as chief technology ofﬁcer or IT manager, management information systems director, or training-related ones, such as IT trainer or IS coach. We deleted questionnaires completed by participants whose current positions did not ﬁt one of our four broad IT job types, as well as those with inconsistent demographic data or incomplete answers to the relevant questions. We ﬁnally came up with a basic population of 813 IT workers for data

Table 1 Operationalization of constructs (TINT, JS, and OC)

Please evaluate the following statements. (5-point likert scale from strongly agree (5) to strongly disagree (1) [TINT1-4], very often (5) to never (1) [TINT4-5], less than 1 year (5) to more than 10 years (1) [TINT7]) Turnover intention (TINT) TINT-1 I think often about quitting my job at my current employer. TINT-2 I intend to quit my actual job. TINT-3 I think about leaving my actual employer. TINT-4 I will look for a new job within the next months. TINT-5 How often do you feel about leaving your current employer? TINT-6 How often do you think about leaving my current employer? TINT-7 How long do you intend to stay with your current employer? How satisﬁed are you with … (5- point likert scale from very satisﬁed (5) to very unsatisﬁed (1)) Job satisfaction (JS) JS-1 … your supervisor? JS-2 … your company as an employer? JS-3 … your career expectations? JS-4 … your rewards? JS-5 … your colleagues? JS-6 … the working conditions? JS-7 … the way to work? JS-8 … your department? JS-9 … the public perception of your employer? JS-10 … the international orientation? JS-11 … the exchange of information? Please evaluate the following statements. (5-point likert scale from strongly agree (7) to strongly disagree (1) Organizational commitment (OC) OC-1 I really care about the fate of this organization. OC-2 I feel very little loyalty to this organization. OC-3 I am willing to put in a great deal of effort beyond that normally expected in order to help this organization be successful. OC-4 I talk up this organization to my friends as a great organization to work for. OC-5 I ﬁnd that my values and the organization’s values are very similar. OC-6 For me this is the best of all possible organizations for which to work.

evaluation including 101 IT consultants, 293 programmers, 154 system engineers, and 265 system administrators. The demographics are summarized in Table 3. Table 4 summarizes the self-estimated personalities of the participating IT employees by IT job type. For each job type the mean value of the respective indicators of each trait of the ﬁve-factor model is stated. System engineers score the

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes Table 2 Operationalization of constructs (Five-factor model)

A Eckhardt et al

55

Five-factor model Please indicate how you felt during the last weeks. (7-point scale from very accurate (7) to very inaccurate (1)) Extraversion talkative extroverted bold energetic shy quiet bashful withdrawn Neuroticism unenvious relaxed moody jealous temperamental envious touchy fretful

highest in openness for experience, programmers in neuroticism, system administrators in agreeableness, IT consultants in extraversion, and system engineers in conscientiousness. Table 4 also includes the results of an ANOVA analysis. These results indicate that the manifestations of the personality variables, openness to experience, neuroticism, extraversion, and conscientiousness, are signiﬁcantly different across the four IT job groups. The only category for which no signiﬁcant differences be observed is agreeableness. Measurement model The following two sections validate the dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types using the data collected from 813 IT personnel from four different IT job types, as deﬁned in the section above. We start the validation by evaluating the measurement model. Measures All basic turnover constructs, job satisfaction (JS), organizational commitment (OC), and turnover intention (TINT), were measured as in prior research (Ang and Slaughter, 2004; Harrison et al., 2006). JS was measured using formative constructs while OC and TINT were measured using reﬂective constructs. Most instruments for measuring the ﬁve-factor model are time-consuming and cost-intensive (e.g., revised NEO personality inventory with 240 items (Costa and McCrae, 1992));

Agreeableness

sympathetic Conscientiousness organized warm efﬁcient kind systematic cooperative practical cold disorganized unsympathetic sloppy rude inefﬁcient harsh careless

Openness to experience creative imaginative philosophical intellectual complex deep uncreative unintellectual

Table 3 Demographics of research participants (N = 813)

Demographics

Gender

Age (in years)

Men (in %) Women (in %) Mean <25 (in %) 25–34 (in %) 35–44 (in %) 45–54 (in %) >54 (in %) Overall sample IT consultants Programmers System engineers System administrators 87.9 81.1 84.4 94.1 90.5 12.1 18.9 15.6 5.9 9.5 39.19 40.02 37.91 40.36 39.58 0.7 0.0 0.7 0.0 1.5 32.9 26.3 39.3 26.0 32.2 Tenure <1 year (in %) Overall sample IT consultants Programmers System engineers System administrators 3.2 2.2 3.4 2.6 3.5 1–5 years (in %) 7.3 2.2 7.2 7.2 9.4 6–10 years (in %) 21.3 24.7 19.7 20.3 22.4 11–15 years (in %) 48.3 46.2 48.3 54.9 45.4 >15 years (in %) 19.9 24.7 21.4 15.0 19.3 39.3 45.3 39.0 42.8 36.2 23.0 21.0 17.2 27.3 26.7 4.1 7.4 3.8 3.9 3.4

Table 4 Mean values for the five-factor model across IT job types

Openness IT consultants Programmers System engineers System administrators F-value (ANOVA) 5.35 5.31 5.58 5.35 3.632*

Neuroticism 3.06 3.23 2.99 3.00 3.521*

Agreeableness 5.56 5.53 5.67 5.68 1.760NS

Extraversion 4.37 3.93 4.27 4.11 5.604***

Conscientiousness 5.36 5.26 5.49 5.47 2.973*

Personality of IT personnel by IT job type (N = 813). Notes: ***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05; P > 0.05 NS (non significant)

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

56

hence short inventories were developed for ensuring short response times (e.g. big ﬁve inventory-10 Rammstedt and John (2007)). Thus we chose to measure the ﬁve-factor model using the mini-marker item set developed by Saucier (1994) with 40 items. We measured the items using reﬂective indicators as recommended by Hardin et al. (2008). For the reﬂective measurement model, four criteria – content validity, indicator reliability, construct reliability, and discriminant validity – must be validated (Chin, 1998), while formative constructs can be evaluated using two phases (Petter et al., 2007). Phase I includes content validity, and phase II model weights and testing for multicollinearity (Chin, 1998; Diamantopoulos and Siguaw, 2006). Content validity To ensure content validity we tested the items in a two-step process. After a ﬁrst pre-test with students in our IS department, we reﬁned the questionnaire items through interviews with three IT personnel employed in large-scale corporations of the IT, retail and ﬁnancial services industry. The results of the pre-tests and the interviews were not integrated into the overall sample. Indicator reliability Indicator reliability shows the proportion of the variance of a single indicator which derives from the relevant latent
Table 5 Structural model results

variables. All loadings should be greater than 0.7 to ensure that at least half of the variance of a latent variable is explained by the used indicators (Carmines and Richard, 1979). As can be seen in Table A5, the loadings of all items for OC, TINT and the ﬁve-factor model are above the recommended thresholds. The signiﬁcance level of all loadings at P⩽0.001 is highly signiﬁcant and was calculated using the bootstrap method with 5000 samples. Construct reliability Quality assessment at the construct level was evaluated using composite reliability (CR). As Tables 5 and 6 and Tables A1
Table 6 Total effect of personality characteristics on turnover intention

IT Programmers consultants Total effect of … on TINT OPEN 0.061 0.193** EXTRA −0.223* 0.160* NEURO 0.144* 0.215*** AGREE −0.080 −0.028 CONS 0.002 0.056

System engineers −0.110 −0.140* 0.284*** 0.018 0.351*

System administrators 0.190 0.078 0.150* −0.106 −0.188**

Notes: ***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05

Hypothesis IT consultants H2a: OPEN -> JS H3a: OPEN -> OC H4a: OPEN -> TINT H2b: EXTRA -> JS H3b: EXTRA -> OC H4b: EXTRA -> TINT H2c: NEURO -> JS H3c: NEURO -> OC H4c: NEURO -> TINT H2d: AGREE -> JS H3d: AGREE -> OC H4d: AGREE -> TINT H2e: CONS -> JS H3e: CONS -> OC H4e: CONS -> TINT JS -> TINT OC -> TINT R2 (JS) R2 (OC) R2 (TINT) 0.041 (NotSup) 0.148 (NotSup) 0.111 (NotSup) 0.184* (Sup) 0.085 (NotSup) −0.095 (NotSup) −0.195* (Sup) 0.061 (NotSup) 0.032 (NotSup) −0.015 (NotSup) 0.139 (NotSup) −0.067 (NotSup) 0.179 (NotSup) 0.151 (NotSup) 0.137 (NotSup) −0.622** (Sup) −0.162* (Sup) 14.3% 12.8% 55.4% Programmers 0.033 (NotSup) 0.069 (NotSup) 0.220** (Sup) −0.160** (NotSup) −0.142* (NotSup) 0.045 (NotSup) −0.213** (Sup) −0.180** (Sup) 0.063 (NotSup) 0.1 (NotSup) 0.095 (NotSup) 0.044 (NotSup) −0.046 (NotSup) 0.043 (NotSup) 0.028 (NotSup) −0.644** (Sup) −0.080 (NotSup) 8.8% 10.8% 54.5%

Sample System engineers 0.183* (Sup) 0.201** (Sup) 0.041 (NotSup) 0.182* (Sup) 0.171* (Sup) 0.001 (NotSup) −0.290* (Sup) −0.286** (Sup) 0.055 (NotSup) 0.133 (NotSup) 0.105 (NotSup) 0.115 (NotSup) 0.201** (Sup) 0.336** (Sup) 0.006 (NotSup) 0.483** (Sup) −0.312*** (Sup) 28.3% 21.6% 56.4% System administrators −0.272** (NotSup) −0.104 (NotSup) 0.017 (NotSup) −0.144* (NotSup) 0.003 (NotSup) −0.001 (NotSup) 0.04 (NotSup) 0.179** (NotSup) 0.052 (NotSup) 0.160* (Sup) 0.166** (Sup) 0.02 (NotSup) 0.131* (Sup) 0.082 (NotSup) −0.097* (Sup) −0.551** (Sup) −0.224** (Sup) 10.6% 3.1% 61.5%

Sup = supported hypothesis; NotSup = not supported hypothesis; OPEN = openness to experience; EXTRA = extraversion; NEURO = neuroticism; AGREE = agreeableness; CONS = conscientiousness. Notes: ***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05.

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

57

and A2 indicate, the estimated values for OC, TINT and the ﬁve-factor model were above the recommended thresholds of 0.7 for CR (Bagozzi and Yi, 1988). Discriminant validity Discriminant validity describes the extent to which measurement items which theoretically should not be equal differ from one another (Campbell and Fiske, 1959). This can be evaluated by looking at the cross-loadings. The loadings for the reﬂective indicators of all constructs in our research model are higher for the corresponding constructs than for any other. Additionally, the loadings must be smaller than the root of the corresponding average variance extracted (AVE). Since this is also the case, as presented in Tables 5 and 6 and Tables A1 and A2, the discriminant validity of the latent variables is high (Hulland, 1999). Weights and multicollinearity As one can see in Table A6, the weights for the formative construct of JS show that most items are signiﬁcant. As demanded for formative constructs all non-signiﬁcant items of JS have to be retained in the measurement model (Bollen and Lennox, 1991; Chin, 1998). The test for multicollinearity using SPSS Statistics 17.0 indicates that multicollinearity does not cause a problem. The VIF-values for the items used in the research model range between 1.2 and 3.1 and are therewith below the suggested threshold of 3.3 (Diamantopoulos and Siguaw, 2006). Structural model The explanatory power of our structural model is evaluated by the squared multiple correlations (R2) and the signiﬁcance levels of the path coefﬁcients (Chin, 1998). The R2 represent the explained variance of endogenous variables (in this research: job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and turnover intention) and indicate how well data points ﬁt a line or curve. It is predominately used in the context of statistical models whose main purpose is the testing of hypotheses on the basis of gathered data. It provides a measure of how well observed outcomes are replicated by the model as the proportion of total variation of outcomes explained by the model (Steel and Torrie, 1960). The R2 for turnover intention show that between 54.5% (programmers) and 61.5% (system administrators) of the endogenous variable is represented by its antecedents (see Table 3). Comparing these values with other studies focusing on turnover intention (Joseph et al., 2007) let us conclude that the absolute explanatory power of our four models is good. Path coefﬁcients represent the degree of correlation between two distinct variables (i.e. in this research between openness and job satisfaction for IT consultants (H2a)). They are standardized versions of linear regression weights which are used in observing the possible causal linkage between statistical variables in the structural equation modeling approach. The standardization involves multiplying the ordinary regression coefﬁcient by the standard deviation of the corresponding explanatory variable: these can then be compared to assess the relative effects of the variables within the ﬁtted model (Wright, 1921). The t-values were evaluated to analyze the path coefﬁcients in the research model.

Signiﬁcance tests were conducted using the bootstrap routine with 5000 samples. The following section discusses the results of the empirical evaluation in detail and provides support for the hypotheses in our research model. Results As illustrated in Table 3, all ﬁve personality traits tested through the ﬁve-factor model have signiﬁcant inﬂuences on the basic constructs of IT personnel turnover. However, the results vary widely concerning IT personnel job types. The personality trait, openness to experience (OPEN), is a signiﬁcant determinant for job satisfaction for system engineers and system administrators, as well as for system engineers’ organizational commitment, and programmers’ turnover intention. Extraversion (EXTRA) is the only personality trait affecting the job satisfaction of all groups observed. However, in two cases (programmers and system administrators) this impact is signiﬁcantly negative. For programmers, extraversion has also a negative impact on organizational commitment, while the impact is signiﬁcantly positive for system engineers. In no case is extraversion a signiﬁcant determinant for turnover intention. Based on the results of the structural models, neuroticism (NEURO) was also identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant predictor for job satisfaction in all groups except for system administrators. Interestingly, neuroticism has a signiﬁcant positive effect on organizational commitment except for system engineers, for whom the impact is signiﬁcantly negative, as hypothesized. As was the case for extraversion, neuroticism also has no signiﬁcant impact on the turnover intention of IT consultants, programmers, system engineers, and system administrators. The fourth trait of the ﬁve-factor model, agreeableness (AGREE), is the least important predictor for the basic IT turnover constructs. Only system administrators are signiﬁcantly affected by agreeableness in terms of job satisfaction and organizational commitment. As in the two preceding cases, there is also no signiﬁcant impact of agreeableness on turnover intention. Finally, the trait conscientiousness (CONS), as hypothesized, signiﬁcantly inﬂuences job satisfaction and turnover intention for system administrators, but signiﬁcantly negatively inﬂuences job satisfaction and organizational commitment among system engineers. All calculated path coefﬁcients and the different signiﬁcance levels are visualized in Table 5. Moreover, the results indicate that the signiﬁcance of the respective path coefﬁcients in each model is signiﬁcantly different (except for the impact of job satisfaction on turnover intention), as hypothesized in H4. Table 6 illustrates the total effect of each factor of the ﬁve-factor model on turnover intention. Total effect is a measure of the strength of a relationship between two variables (i.e. in this research between openness and turnover intention for IT consultants: 0.061) in a statistical population or a sample-based estimate of that quantity. An effect size calculated from data is a descriptive statistic that conveys the estimated magnitude of a relationship without making a statement about whether the apparent relationship in the data reﬂects a true relationship in the population (Kelley and Preacher, 2012). Table 6 indicates that in addition to the impact of personality on job satisfaction and organizational commitment, there is also a total (indirect) effect on turnover intention.

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

58

Discussion and implications for future research An essential part of organizations’ long-term success is to recruit and retain employees with the suitable related proﬁles for their open positions. Unfortunately, this type of talent is scarce on labor markets, as IT personnel often possess specialized knowledge for their job type that is difﬁcult and expensive to replace. Therefore, our study analyzes how IT personnel differ based on their personality and how the inﬂuence of these individual characteristics on job-related attitudes differs across four IT job types. The results provide organizations with new in-depth knowledge for recruiting and retention about the effect of personality for their IT workers job-related attitudes and turnover intentions. The dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types, theoretically developed and empirically evaluated in this research, is the ﬁrst approach in IT turnover research combining the personality traits of the ﬁve-factor model – openness to experience, extraversion, neuroticism, agreeableness, and conscientiousness – to the basic constructs of IT turnover – job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and turnover intention – into one research model for four different groups of IT professionals. As prior research indicates that IT personnel largely vary in terms of their attitudes and behavior depending on their job type (Lo and Riemenschneider, 2011), we observe and distinguish the nuances of the role and impact in our work. This enhances prior work, such as Lounsbury et al. (2007), who observe the inﬂuence of ﬁve broader traits and ﬁve traits narrower in conceptual scope (assertiveness, image management, optimism, tough-mindedness, and work drive) on job and career satisfaction for an unspeciﬁed group of IT professionals, by providing a more comprehensive understanding of the impact of different IT workers’ personality on the components of the basic turnover model found among Western IS professionals (Lacity et al., 2008). With regard to the results by Lacity et al. (2008), we ﬁnd several different impacts of the personality traits of the ﬁve-factor model on the basic IT turnover constructs for the four observed IT job proﬁles. Our study indicates that IT consultants, programmers, system engineers, and system administrators do not only differ according to their job-related attitudes and turnover intention but also according to their personality traits. Moreover, our results show that the impact of each trait on job-related attitudes and the total effects on turnover intention varies widely across different IT job types among the IT personnel observed. We also extend the work by Lo and Riemenschneider (2011), showing that IT personnel are a diverse and heterogeneous group in terms of personality. Additionally, we extend the work of Wynekoop and Walz (1998) by showing that the speciﬁc IT job type also moderates the impact of personality characteristics on job-related attitudes and thereby on IT personnel turnover intention. We thus provide empirical evidence that personality is an important predictor for job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and turnover intention and hence for IT personnel turnover in general. Integrating these variables into one model enhances our understanding of the complex processes that lead to IT personnel turnover. The complexity can be observed especially in the moderated inﬂuence of personality by IT job type, as personality has a larger effect for some IT job types than for others. This underlines the importance of accounting for heterogeneity among IT personnel, which has already been

indicated by previous research (Enns et al., 2006; Ahuja et al., 2007; Prasad et al., 2007; Lo and Riemenschneider, 2011). Another important implication from our research is the mediated impact of personality characteristics on turnover intention. As indicated in Table 3, in addition to indirectly affecting turnover intention, applying the ﬁve-factor model also reveals the signiﬁcance of openness to experience for programmers, of extraversion for IT consultants, programmers and system engineers, of neuroticism for IT consultants, programmers and system engineers, and of conscientiousness for system engineers and system administrators. Only agreeableness has no direct or indirect effect on IT personnel turnover intention. These results indicate that the indirect impact of personality characteristics on turnover intention varies across the four IT job types tested. Our results also show that while extraversion and neuroticism are the most inﬂuential predictors for all IT job groups, agreeableness is the less inﬂuential one. However, each trait is at least important for one of the four IT job types tested. The common and divergent results for IT consultants, programmers, system engineers, and system administrators are discussed in detail in the following sections. IT consultants The evaluation of the proposed model as applied to IT consultants reveals that extraversion has a direct positive inﬂuence on their job satisfaction and neuroticism has a direct negative impact on job satisfaction. Extroverted IT consultants are more likely to be satisﬁed with their job than introverted IT consultants and less neurotic IT consultants are more satisﬁed with their job than highly neurotic IT consultants. For this group, a signiﬁcant indirectly effect of neuroticism and extraversion on turnover intention can be observed. Thus, job-related attitudes of IT consultants are predicted by the two traits neuroticism and extraversion. The results for IT consultants might be explained by the job characteristics of this particular job type and the characteristics of neuroticism and extraversion. Extroverts are predisposed to experience positive emotions more frequently (Costa and McCrae, 1992). They have more friends and spend more time socializing than introverts do and because of their social facility, they are likely to ﬁnd interpersonal interactions (such as those that occur at work) more rewarding (Watson and Clark, 1997). Thus, the IT consultant job attribute involving talking to clients and working in teams is more in synch with the characteristics of extroverts. Therefore, extroverted IT consultants are statistically more satisﬁed with their job than non-extroverted IT consultants. Thus, more extroverted IT consultants who are more likely to be satisﬁed will, consequently, more likely remain at their current job. Moreover, due to their essentially negative natures, neurotic individuals experience more negative life events than others (Magnus et al., 1993) in part because they put themselves into situations that foster negative affect (Emmons et al., 1985). As these situations can also occur on or in relation to the job of an IT consultant, they would lead to lower levels of job satisfaction (Judge et al., 2001). These ﬁndings are directly related to organizational commitment and turnover intention, which may develop out of an employee’s fear of the costs associated with leaving her current position (Meyer and Allen, 1991;

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

59

Meyer and Allen, 1997) and the apprehension she may feel about facing a new work environment that could provide even harsher experiences (Erdheim et al., 2006). As IT consultants have to change their working environment frequently (Ahuja et al., 2007), neurotic IT consultants are less satisﬁed with their job which will in turn increase their turnover intention. Programmers Evaluating the proposed model as applied to programmers shows that their openness to experience correlates signiﬁcantly with their turnover intention; extraversion has a signiﬁcant direct negative impact on job satisfaction and organizational commitment, and neuroticism directly negatively impacts job satisfaction and organizational commitment. In other words, extroverted programmers are less satisﬁed with their job than non-extroverted ones and those who are more open to experiences are more likely to leave their employer. This is in line with the result that more neurotic programmers are less satisﬁed with their job and less committed to their employer. Overall, a signiﬁcant impact of openness, neuroticism, and extraversion can be observed, making these three traits important for programmers in terms of job-related attitudes and intentions. The effect of neuroticism can again be explained based on the negative nature because these individuals put themselves into situations that foster negative affect (Emmons et al., 1985). Hence, neurotic programmers are also more likely to be dissatisﬁed with their job and are less committed to their employer. The interesting result of applying the proposed model to programmers is the observed negative inﬂuence of extraversion on job satisfaction and organizational commitment. This might be due to the fact that extroverts spend more time in socializing than introverts do and their social facility leads them to ﬁnd interpersonal interactions at work and in general more rewarding (Watson and Clark, 1997). However, the job proﬁle of a programmer includes a lot of tasks that have to be accomplished with less social interaction, so extroverted programmers are less satisﬁed with their job and less committed to their organization than those who are more introverted. Hence, although the results contradict our original assumptions, the observed effect of extraversion seems logical for the group of programmers. System engineers Applying the proposed model to system engineers reveals that openness to experience has a direct positive impact on job satisfaction and organizational commitment, and neuroticism has a direct negative effect on job satisfaction and organizational commitment. Moreover, extraversion and conscientiousness both have a direct positive impact on job satisfaction and organizational commitment. In terms of total effects, neuroticism, conscientiousness, and extraversion are signiﬁcant predictors for turnover intention. The effect of neuroticism is similar for programmers and IT consultants and the effect of extraversion is parallel to IT consultants. The interesting result of analyzing the impact of the ﬁve-factor model on job-related attitudes is the signiﬁcant effect of conscientiousness, which is insigniﬁcant for both programmers and IT consultants. Prior research has argued that conscientiousness should be positively related to job

satisfaction and should result in a greater tendency to be involved in work and a greater likelihood of receiving satisfying formal (e.g., higher salary) and informal (e.g., feelings of personal accomplishment) work rewards (Organ and Lingl, 1995). Our research model for IT personnel ﬁnds positive relationships between conscientiousness and job satisfaction as well as organizational commitment for system engineers. System engineers are responsible for designing and analyzing large-scale, efﬁcient and effective information systems, which requires a high degree of accuracy. Hence, IT employees with a predisposition to conscientiousness are more satisﬁed by work that also requires high precision, such as system engineering. Consequently, it is not surprising that we can observe a signiﬁcant impact of conscientiousness on job satisfaction and organizational commitment for system engineers. Hence, more conscientious system engineers are statistically more satisﬁed with their job and employer than are less conscientious system engineers. Although Americans are known to be a more conscientious culture than Germany, Lounsbury et al. (2007) do not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant relationship between conscientiousness and job satisfaction for IT personnel in the US. Further research linking intercultural comparisons in personality research (McCrae, 2001) with basic IT turnover constructs (Lacity et al., 2008) needs to particularly focus on these differences between German and American IT personnel. Moreover, it is interesting to see that the positive effect of openness to experience can only be observed for the group of system engineers. Deneve and Cooper (1998) indicate that ‘openness to experience is a “double-edged sword” that predisposes individuals to feel both the good and the bad more deeply’ (p. 199), rendering its directional inﬂuence on affective reactions like job satisfaction or organizational commitment unclear (Judge et al., 2002). Interestingly, in our research we ﬁnd this personality trait to be a signiﬁcant determinant for job satisfaction and organizational commitment only for system engineers. This might explain why prior approaches in turnover research for other occupations did not ﬁnd this variable as a signiﬁcant predictor for job satisfaction (Barrick and Mount, 1996; Judge et al., 2002) or organizational commitment (Erdheim et al., 2006), as this predisposition only proved to be important for one IT job type. In the case of system engineers, one has to consider the engineering and scientiﬁc tasks of this particular IT job proﬁle. If an individual is more disposed to be open to experience one might also be more satisﬁed with a job that requires constantly new experiences and challenges, such as system engineering. System administrators Based on the proposed hypotheses of the dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types, the results of the analysis with system administrators show that agreeableness has a direct positive impact on job satisfaction and organizational commitment, and conscientiousness has a direct positive impact on job satisfaction. However, signiﬁcant relationships that contradict our hypotheses can also be observed for the group of system administrators (i.e. a direct negative impact of openness and extraversion on job satisfaction). Furthermore, a signiﬁcant impact of neuroticism and conscientiousness on turnover intention can also be observed in our study.

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

60

The interesting results for the group of system administrators are that the impact of openness, neuroticism, and agreeableness is different from the three other groups, and that the impact of extraversion on this group is similar to its inﬂuence on programmers. Hence, the observed negative inﬂuence of extraversion on job satisfaction and organizational commitment might also be explained by the fact that extroverts spend more time in socializing and direct interaction than introverts do but the job proﬁle of system administrators includes a lot of tasks that can be accomplished with less social interaction. Interestingly, the effect of agreeableness is only signiﬁcant for the job type of system administrators. In this context, McCrae and Costa (1991) stated that agreeableness should be related to a sense of pleasure because agreeable persons have a greater motivation to create an agreeable interpersonal environment and a feeling of common well-being. Moreover, they strive to help others and are convinced that others will behave just as helpfully. As the job proﬁle of system administrators explicitly involves supporting others by keeping the system running, provide support for failures, etc., individuals who enjoy helping other people altruistically are more satisﬁed as system administrators than individuals who do not enjoy this. Hence, the positive correlation between agreeableness and the job-related attitudes of system administrators conﬁrms the fact that more agreeable system administrators are more satisﬁed with their job. Practical implications Beside the theoretical importance of an evaluation of the dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types, this study has a number of potential practical beneﬁts. Concerning the great efforts being made to retain IT personnel (Moore and Burke, 2002), understanding how personality traits affect IT personnel turnover intention is likely to lead to cost-effective means of reducing turnover. Companies can select and assign their current IT personnel to IT job proﬁles based on their personality not only to improve the employeejob ﬁt but also to enhance their job satisfaction and organizational commitment. This helps managers avoid the mistake of assigning people with particular personality traits to tasks that do not ﬁt their personality. For example, the results of our research model evaluation indicate that if a manager assigns IT personnel high on openness to experience to system administration tasks, the job satisfaction and organizational commitment of these IT personnel will drop signiﬁcantly. The same holds true for assigning extroverted IT personnel to software programming and development projects. As programmers who score high on openness to experience will more likely leave their current employer, companies need to develop extensive retention and personnel development programs providing current IT personnel in general and open-minded programmers in particular with various internal career path opportunities for further individual development. The results of our research even more implicate that organizations’ future approaches for hiring IT personnel need to be as speciﬁc as possible and target group oriented, in order to ﬁnd the proper personalities for working within the IT department.

Limitations and future research This paper is a ﬁrst step to analyze the impact of personality on job-related attitudes and turnover intentions of different groups of IT personnel. Hence, this approach appears to be rather positivistic in nature. However, the reason why we tackle our research topic from a quantitative than a qualitative base lies in the construct of personality. Owing to the difﬁculty to capture personality traits by qualitative research methods as expert interviews or case study designs, we need to rely on quantitative survey instruments. Owing to this, future research might consider to provide more mixed-method approaches to reduce the rather positivistic viewpoint for this speciﬁc research ﬁeld. As the results and implications are just targeted on the IT ﬁeld, the results cannot necessarily be generalized to other occupations. Our results derive from one online survey, so future research might consider proving these ﬁndings by surveying IT personnel in one distinct company or IT personnel not registered in an online job board. Another limitation is that only IT personnel in Germany were surveyed. Depending on the cultural background, the model could result in different correlations. In fact, prior research indicates that job-related attitudes and turnover could differ a lot for IT personnel in India or in other Western countries (Lacity et al., 2008). Future research needs to address this issue by evaluating our model within a cultural context different from those of Western European countries (e.g., India or China). In addition, the different sample sizes of the four groups of IT personnel observed may cause some bias, while the sample sizes for programmers (293) and system administrators (265) were fairly large, the sample sizes for IT consultants (101) and system engineers (154) were fairly small. Hence, the results for the smaller groups may be less likely to represent the target population than the results for the larger groups. It would be important to evaluate the meaningfulness of our results by testing the model with equal group sample sizes. Future research could also enhance our moderating variable of IT job type by evaluating our model with IT job types of the executive and managing group of IT personnel, which were not part of the four groups tested. Examples for this group include the chief technology ofﬁcer, chief information ofﬁcer, computer and information systems manager, information technology director, information technology manager or the management information systems director. While we integrate two sorts of individual differences as inﬂuencing factors for IT personnel’s job-related attitudes and intentions, namely predisposed personality (McCrae and Costa, 2006), and the demographical variable of IT job type, future research might consider to enhance our model by adding further individual situation-speciﬁc differences in addition to the general and broad big ﬁve (McCrae and Costa, 1991) such as personal innovativeness or self-efﬁcacy. As the big ﬁve capture individual traits at the highest level, several researchers have provided empirical evidence and concluded that virtually all traits within human personality fall within the big ﬁve (Saucier and Goldberg, 1998). However, some research suggests that at least one additional factor, such as the broad honesty factor (Ashton et al., 2000), should be integrated as sixth major dimension of personality (Paunonen and Ashton, 2001).

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

61

To account for job-related attitudes we integrated job satisfaction in our model, because it is known from prior IS research as one of the most important predictors for IT personnel turnover intention (Joseph et al., 2007). Job satisfaction is a multi-faceted phenomenon that could be measured by both the satisfaction with individual factors (e.g., job-related factors) or satisfaction with organizational factors (e.g., work environment, remuneration, incentives) (Lo, 2013). Because we were predominately interested in the effect of individual characteristics in terms of personality and IT job type on the satisfaction with organizational factors, we did not integrate speciﬁc job-related factors known from research on organizational behavior (Hackman and Oldham, 1980) into our model, such as autonomy, task identity, or meaningfulness of the job, as they are captured by the moderating factor of IT job type. Nevertheless, it would be an interesting avenue for future research to evaluate the impact of personality factors and IT job type on job satisfaction solely measured with individual factors. Additionally, there are further organizational factors like satisfaction with organizational justice (Ang et al., 2003), which were not incorporated in the measurement of job satisfaction in our research. Subsequent approaches might consider including them in their measurement. Eventually, in addition to individual characteristics, there are social factors like subjective norm (Lo, 2013) that might also affect job satisfaction; so future research should consider their importance in this context. Conclusion We contribute to current research by developing and evaluating a dispositional model of turnover intention across IT job types as the ﬁrst approach in IT turnover research combining the personality traits of the ﬁve-factor model (McCrae and Costa, 2006) and the basic constructs of IT turnover (Lacity et al., 2008) one research model. As prior research indicated that IT personnel vary in terms of their attitudes and behavior depending on their job type (Lo and Riemenschneider, 2011), we analyze the impact for four different groups of IT professionals – IT consultants, programmers, system engineers, and system administrators. In general, we show that an IT worker’s personality is an important direct predictor of job satisfaction and organizational commitment, and an indirect predictor of turnover intention. We evaluate the model using empirical data of 813 IT personnel in Germany. The results reveal several differences between the four IT job types of IT consultants, programmers, system engineers, and system administrators. We ﬁnd that IT consultants’ job-related attitudes can be predicted by extraversion and neuroticism as proposed by the developed hypotheses. For programmers, we observe a signiﬁcant impact of neuroticism and extraversion, whereas the inﬂuence of extraversion contradicts our proposed hypotheses. However, this effect can be explained by the job characteristics of programmers. In the case of system engineers we can observe a positive effect of openness to experience, extraversion, and conscientiousness and a negative effect of neuroticism. For system administrators a negative effect of extraversion and openness to experience, and a positive effect of neuroticism, agreeableness, and conscientiousness can be observed. Here again, the results contradicting our hypotheses can be explained by the job type of system administrators.

References
Ahuja, M.K., Chudoba, K., Kacmar, C.J., McKnight, D.H. and George, J.F. (2007). IT Road Warriors: Balancing work-family, conﬂict, job autonomy, and work overload to mitigate turnover intentions, MIS Quarterly 30(3): 1–17. Ang, S., Dyne, L.V. and Begley, T. (2003). The Employment Relationships of Foreign Workers Versus Local Employees: A ﬁeld study of organizational justice, job satisfaction, performance, and OCB, Journal of Organizational Behavior 24: 561–583. Ang, S. and Slaughter, S. (2004). Turnover of Information Technology Professionals: The effects of internal labor market strategies, SIGMIS Database 35(3): 11–27. Ashton, M.C., Lee, K. and Son, C. (2000). Honesty as the Sixth Factor of Personality: Correlations with machiavellianism, primary psychopathy, and social adroitness, European Journal of Personality 14(4): 359–368. Bagozzi, R.P. and Yi, Y. (1988). On the Evaluation of Structural Equation Models, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 16(1): 74–94. Barrick, M.R. and Mount, M.K. (1991). The Big Five Personality Dimensions and Job Performance: A meta-analysis, Personnel Psychology 44(1): 1–26. Barrick, M.R. and Mount, M.K. (1996). Effects of Impression Management and Self-Deception on the Predictive Validity of Personality Constructs, Journal of Applied Psychology 81(3): 261–272. Bendersky, C. and Shah, N.P. (2013). The Downfall of Extraverts and Rise of Neurotics: The dynamic process of status allocation in task groups, Academy of Management Journal 56(2): 387–406. Bollen, K. and Lennox, R. (1991). Conventional Wisdom on Measurement: A structural equation perspective, Psychological Bulletin 110(2): 305. Campbell, D.T. and Fiske, D.W. (1959). Convergent and Discriminant Validation by the Multitrait-Multimethod Matrix, Psychological Bulletin 56(2): 81–105. Carayon, P., Schoepke, J., Hoonakker, P.L.T., Haims, M.C. and Brunette, M. (2006). Evaluating Causes and Consequences of Turnover Intention among It Workers: The development of a questionnaire survey, Behaviour & Information Technology 25(5): 381–397. Carmines, E.G. and Richard, A.Z. (1979). Reliability and Validity Assessment, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications. Chang, C.L.H., Jiang, J.J., Klein, G. and Chen, H.G. (2012). Career Anchors and Disturbances in Job Turnover Decisions – A case study of IT/IS professionals in Taiwan, Information & Management 49(6): 309–319. Chin, W.W. (1998). Issues and Opinion on Structural Equation Modeling, MIS Quarterly 22(1): xii–xvi. Clark, L.A. and Watson, D. (1999). Temperament: A new paradigm for trait psychology, in L.A. Pervin and O.P. John (eds.) Handbook of Personality: Theory and research, New York: Guilford Press, pp. 399–423. Costa, P.T. and McCrae, R.R. (1992). Neo Personality Inventory Professional Manual, Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. Deneve, K.M. and Cooper, H. (1998). The Happy Personality: A metaanalysis of 137 personality traits and subjective well-being, Psychological Bulletin 124: 197–229. Diamantopoulos, A. and Siguaw, J.A. (2006). Formative Versus Reﬂective Indicators in Organizational Measure Development: A comparison and empirical illustration, British Journal of Management 17(4): 263–282. Eckhardt, A., Laumer, S. and Weitzel, T. (2009). Who Inﬂuences Whom? Analyzing Workplace Referents’ Social Inﬂuence on IT Adoption and Non-Adoption, Journal of Information Technology 24(1): 11–24. Eisenberger, R., Armeli, S., Rexwinkel, B., Lynch, P.D. and Rhoades, L. (2001). Reciprocation of Perceived Organizational Support, Journal of Applied Psychology 86(1): 42–51. Emmons, R.A. (1986). Personal Strivings: An approach to personality and subjective well-being, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 51(5): 1058–1068. Emmons, R.A., Diener, E. and Larsen, R.J. (1985). Choice of Situations and Congruence Models of Interactionism, Personality and Individual Differences 6(6): 693–702. Enns, H.G., Ferratt, T.W. and Prasad, J. (2006). Beyond Stereotypes of IT Professionals: Implications for IT HR practices, Communications of the ACM 49(4): 105–109. Erdheim, J., Wang, M. and Zickar, M.J. (2006). Linking the Big Five Personality Constructs to Organizational Commitment, Personality and Individual Differences 41(5): 959–970. Fu, P.P., Tsui, A.S., Liu, J. and Li, L. (2010). Pursuit of Whose Happiness? Executive Leaders’ Transformational Behaviors and Personal Values, Administrative Science Quarterly 55(2): 222.

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

62

Gallivan, M.J. (2004). Examining It Professionals’ Adaptation to Technological Change: The inﬂuence of gender and personal attributes, The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems 35(3): 28–49. Gupta, P. (2001). Growth Scenario of It Industries in India, Communications of the ACM 44(7): 40–41. Guzley, R.M. (1992). Organizational Climate and Communication Climate: Predictors of commitment to the organization, Management Communication Quarterly 5(4): 379–402. Hackman, J.R. and Oldham, G.R. (1980). Work Redesign, Reading: Addison-Wesley. Hardin, A.M., Chang, J.C.-J. and Fuller, M.A. (2008). Formative vs. Reﬂective Measurement: Comment on Marakas, Johnson, and Clay (2007), Journal of the Association for Information Systems 9(9): 519–534. Harrison, D.A., Newman, D.A. and Roth, P.L. (2006). How Important Are Job Attitudes? Meta-Analytic Comparisons of Integrative Behavioral Outcomes and Time Sequences, Academy of Management Journal 49(2): 305–325. Hirschheim, R. and Newman, M. (2010). Houston, We’ve Had a Problem … Offshoring, IS Employment and the IS Discipline: Perception is not reality, Journal of Information Technology 25(4): 358–372. Hogan, R. and Hogan, M. (2001). Assessing Leadership: A view from the dark side, International Journal of Selection and Assessment 9(1–2): 40–51. Holland, J.L. (1996). Exploring Careers with a Typology, American Psychologist 51(4): 397–406. Hoppcock, R. (1935). Job Satisfaction, New York: Harper and Brothers. Hulland, J. (1999). Use of Partial Least Squares (PLS) in Strategic Management Research: A review of four recent studies, Strategic Management Journal 20(2): 195–204. Hurtz, G.M. and Donovan, J.J. (2000). Personality and Job Performance: The big ﬁve revisited, Journal of Applied Psychology 85(6): 869–879. Igbaria, M. and Greenhaus, J.H. (1992). The Career Advancement Prospects of Managers and Professionals: Are MIS employees unique? Decision Sciences 23(2): 478–499. Igbaria, M. and Siegel, S.R. (1992). The Reasons for Turnover of Information Systems Personnel, Information & Management 23(6): 321–330. Ilies, R. and Judge, T.A. (2002). Understanding the Dynamic Relationships among Personality, Mood, and Job Satisfaction: A ﬁeld experience sampling study, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 89(2): 1119–1139. Irving, P. and Meyer, G. (1999). On Using Residual Difference Scores in the Measurement of Congruence: The case of met expectations research, Personnel Psychology 52(1): 85–95. Jiang, J.J., Klein, G. and Balloun, J.L. (2001). The Joint Impact of Internal and External Career Anchors on Entry-Level Is Career Satisfaction, Information & Management 39(1): 31–39. Joseph, D., Kok-Yee, N., Koh, C. and Soon, A. (2007). Turnover of Information Technology Professionals: A narrative review, meta-analytic structural equation modeling, and model development, MIS Quarterly 31(3): 547–577. Judge, T.A., Bono, J.E., Thoresen, C.J. and Patton, G.K. (2001). The Job Satisfaction-Job Performance Relationship: A qualitative and quantitative review, Psychological Bulletin 127(3): 376. Judge, T.A., Heller, D. and Mount, M.K. (2002). Five-Factor Model of Personality and Job Satisfaction: A meta-analysis, Journal of Applied Psychology 87(3): 530–541. Judge, T.A., Higgins, C.A., Thoresen, C.J. and Barrick, M.R. (1999). The Big Five Personality Traits, General Mental Ability, and Career Success Across the Life Span, Personnel Psychology 52(3): 621–652. Judge, T.A., Piccolo, R.F. and Kosalka, T. (2009). The Bright and Dark Sides of Leader Traits: A review and theoretical extension of the leader trait paradigm, The Leadership Quarterly 20(6): 855–875. Kelley, K. and Preacher, K.J. (2012). On effect size, Psychological Methods 17(2): 137–152. Lacity, M., Iyer, V. and Rudramuniyaiah, P. (2008). Turnover Intentions of Indian is Professionals, Information Systems Frontiers 10(2): 225–241. Laumer, S. and Eckhardt, A. (2010). Analyzing IT Personnel’s Perception of Jobrelated Factors in Good and Bad Times, in Proceedings of the 2010 ACM SIGMIS CPR Conference, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Laumer, S., Maier, C., Eckhardt, A. and Weitzel, A. (2012). Are we in the Right Profession? – Comparing information systems, computer science and other disciplines’ professional’s perceptions of the job market, in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM SIGMIS CPR Conference, Milwaukee, WI. Laumer, S., Maier, C., Eckhardt, A. and Weitzel, T. (2011). The Trend is our Friend – German IT personnel’s perception of job-related factors before, during and after the economic downturn, in Proceedings of the 2011 ACM SIGMIS CPR Conference, San Antonio, TX.

Le, H., Oh, I.S., Robbins, S.B., Ilies, R., Holland, E. and Westrick, P. (2011). Too Much of a Good Thing: Curvilinear relationships between personality traits and job performance, Journal of Applied Psychology 96(1): 113–133. Lee, D.M.S., Trauth, E.M. and Farwell, D. (1995). Critical Skills and Knowledge Requirements of Is Professionals: A joint academic/industry investigation, MIS Quarterly 19(3): 313–340. Lee, T.W. and Mitchell, T.R. (1994). An Alternative Approach: The unfolding model of voluntary employee turnover, Academy of Management Review 19(1): 51–89. Lee, T.W. and Mowday, R.T. (1987). Voluntarily Leaving an Organization: An empirical investigation of steers and mowday’s model of turnover, Academy of Management Journal 30(4): 721–743. Lo, J. (2013). The Information Technology Workforce: A review and assessment of voluntary turnover research, Information Systems Frontiers. January 2013, http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10796-013-9408-y. Lo, J. and Riemenschneider, C. (2011). Heterogeneity of IT Employees: An analysis of a model of perceived organizational support by job type, Database for Advances in Information Systems 42(3): 71–95. Lounsbury, J.W., Mofﬁtt, L., Gibson, L.W., Drost, A.W. and Stevens, M. (2007). An Investigation of Personality Traits in Relation to Job and Career Satisfaction of Information Technology Professionals, Journal of Information Technology 22(2): 174–183. Luftman, J. and Kempaiah, R. (2008). Key Issues for It Executives 2007, MIS Quarterly Executive 7(2): 99–112. Maertz, Jr C.P. and Campion, M.A. (2004). Proﬁles in Quitting: Integrating process and content turnover theory, Academy of Management Journal 47(4): 566–582. Maertz, Jr C.P. and Griffeth, R.W. (2004). Eight Motivational Forces and Voluntary Turnover: A theoretical synthesis with implications for research, Journal of Management 30(5): 667–683. Magnus, K., Diener, E., Fujita, F. and Pavot, W. (1993). Extraversion and Neuroticism as Predictors of Objective Life Events: A longitudinal analysis, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65(5): 1046–1053. Maier, C., Laumer, S., Eckhardt, A. and Weitzel, T. (2013). Analyzing the Impact of HRIS Implementations on HR Personnel’s job Satisfaction and Turnover Intention, Journal of Strategic Information Systems 22(3): 193–207. March, J.G. and Simon, H.A. (1958). Organizations, New York u.a: Wiley. McAdams, D.P. (1996). Personality, Modernity, and the Storied Self: A contemporary framework for studying persons, Psychological Inquiry 7(4): 295–321. McCrae, R.R. (2001). Trait Psychology and Culture: Exploring intercultural comparisons, Journal of Personality 69(6): 819–846. McCrae, R.R. and Costa, P.T. (1991). Adding Liebe Und Arbeit: The full ﬁve-factor model and well-being, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 17(2): 227–232. McCrae, R.R. and Costa, P.T. (2006). Personality in Adulthood: A ﬁve-factor theory perspective, New York: Guilford Press. Meyer, J.P. and Allen, N.J. (1991). A Three-Component Conceptualization of Organizational Commitment, Human Resource Management Review 1(1): 61. Meyer, J.P. and Allen, N.J. (1997). Commitment in the Workplace: Theory, research and application, California: Sage Publishers Inc. Mobley, W.H., Horner, S.O. and Hollingsworth, A.T. (1978). An Evaluation of Precursors of Hospital Employee Turnover, Journal of Applied Psychology 63(4): 408–414. Moore, J.E. and Burke, L.A. (2002). How to Turn around ‘Turnover Culture’ in IT, Communications of the ACM 45(2): 73–78. Moore, J.E. and Love, M.S. (2005). IT Professionals as Organizational Citizens, Communications of the ACM 48(6): 88–93. Organ, D.W. and Lingl, A. (1995). Personality, Satisfaction, and Organizational Citizenship Behavior, Journal of Social Psychology 135(3): 339–350. Paunonen, S.V. and Ashton, M.C. (2001). Big Five Factors and Facets and the Prediction of Behavior, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 81(3): 524–539. Petter, S., Straub, D. and Rai, A. (2007). Specifying Formative Constructs in Information Systems Research, MIS Quarterly 31(4): 623–656. Porter, L.W., Steers, R.M., Mowday, R.T. and Boulian, P.W. (1974). Organizational Commitment, Job Satisfaction, and Turnover among Psychiatric Technicians, Journal of Applied Psychology 59(5): 603–609. Prasad, J., Enns, H.G. and Ferratt, T.W. (2007). One Size Does Not Fit All: Managing IT employees’ employment arrangements, Human Resource Management 46(3): 349–372. Rammstedt, B. and John, O.P. (2007). Measuring Personality in One Minute or Less: A 10-item short version of the big ﬁve inventory in english and German, Journal of Research in Personality 41(1): 203–212.

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

63

Ridgeway, C.L. (1982). Status in Groups: The importance of motivation, American Sociological Review 47(1): 76–88. Salgado, J.F. (2002). The Big Five Personality Dimensions and Counterproductive Behaviors, International Journal of Selection and Assessment 10(1&2): 117–125. Saucier, G. (1994). Mini-Markers: A brief version of Goldberg’s unipolar big-ﬁve markers, Journal of Personality Assessment 63(3): 506–516. Saucier, G. and Goldberg, L.R. (1998). What is Beyond the Big Five? Journal of Personality 66(4): 495–524. Schein, E.H. (1978). Career Dynamics: Matching individual and organizational needs, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Smidts, A., Pruyn, A.T.H. and van Riel, C.B.M. (2001). The Impact of Employee Communication and Perceived External Prestige on Organizational Identiﬁcation, Academy of Management Journal 44(5): 1051–1062. Staw, B.M., Bell, N.E. and Clausen, J.A. (1986). The Dispositional Approach to Job Attitudes: A lifetime longitudinal test, Administrative Science Quarterly 31(1): 56–77. Steel, R.G.D. and Torrie, J.H. (1960). Principles and Procedures of Statistics, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Tamir, M. (2005). Don’t Worry, Be Happy? Neuroticism, Trait-Consistent Affect Regulation, and Performance, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 89(3): 449–461. Tan, M. and Igbaria, M. (1994). Turnover and remuneration of information technology professionals in Singapore, Information & Management 26(4): 219–229. Thatcher, J.B., Stepina, L.P. and Boyle, R.J. (2002). Turnover of Information Technology Workers: Examining empirically the inﬂuence of attitudes, job characteristics, and external markets, Journal of Management Information Systems 19(3): 231–261. Trombetta, J.J. and Rogers, D.P. (1988). Communication Climate, Job Satisfaction, and Organizational Commitment, Management Communication Quarterly 1(4): 494–514. Watson, D. and Clark, L.A. (1997). Extraversion and Its Positive Emotional Core, in R. Hogan, J.A. Johnson and S.R. Briggs (eds.) Handbook of Personality Psychology, San Diego: Academic Press. Weitzel, T., Eckhardt, A. and Laumer, S. (2009). A Framework for Recruiting It Talent: Lessons from Siemens, MIS Quarterly Executive (MISQE) 8(4): 175–189. Wiener, Y. (1982). Commitment in Organizations: A normative view, Academy of Management Review 7(3): 418–428. Wright, S. (1921). Correlation and Causation, Journal of Agricultural Research 20(7): 557–585. Wynekoop, J.L. and Walz, D.B. (1998). Revisiting the Perennial Question: Are IS people different? The Database for Advances in Information Systems 29(2): 62–72. Zimmerman, R.D. (2008). Understanding the Impact of Personality Traits on Individuals’ Turnover Decisions: A meta-analytic path model, Personnel Psychology 61(2): 309–348.

research on IS usage, HCI, technostress, E-HRM, BPM and IT workforce management has been published in two books, several conference proceedings, and scientiﬁc journals including Journal of Information Technology, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, European Journal of Information Systems, MIS Quarterly Executive, Journal of Business Economics, and Business & Information Systems Engineering. He is the winner of the ACM SIGMIS Magid Igbaria Outstanding Conference Paper of the Year 2011 Award. Sven Laumer is Assistant Professor at University of Bamberg, Germany. He is interested in user acceptance, user resistance, and techno-stress in general and the support of information systems for HR tasks in organizations, virtual teams, IT workforce, computer-supported cooperative work, and process-oriented enterprise content management in particular. His research has been published among others in Journal of Information Technology, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, European Journal of Information Systems, Information Systems Frontiers, Wirtschaftsinformatik and MIS Quarterly Executive as well as in the proceedings of various conferences (including ICIS). He is the winner of the ACM SIGMIS Magid Igbaria Outstanding Conference Paper of the Year 2011 Award. Christian Maier is a Doctoral Fellow at the University of Bamberg. His research results about technostress, IT adoption and usage, user personality, and the IT workforce has been published in European Journal of Information Systems, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, Journal of Business Economics, Business & Information Systems Engineering, and proceedings of various conferences including ICIS, ECIS, and AMCIS. He is the winner of the ACM SIGMIS Magid Igbaria Outstanding Conference Paper of the Year 2011 Award. Tim Weitzel is Full Professor and Chair of Information Systems and Services at the University of Bamberg, Germany. Tim’s research on IT management, standardization, IT business alignment, outsourcing and eHRM has been published in journals including MIS Quarterly, Journal of Management Information Systems, European Journal of Information Systems, Journal of Information Technology, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, MIS Quarterly Executive, and Business & Information Systems Engineering and has been cited over 2000 times.

About the authors Andreas Eckhardt is Assistant Professor at the Institute of Information Systems of Goethe University Frankfurt. His

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

64

Appendix
Table A1 Discriminant validity for sample ‘IT consultants’

CR 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Openness 0.89 Neuroticism 0.77 Agreeableness 0.91 Extraversion 0.80 Conscientiousness 0.85 Job satisfaction Formative Organizational commitment 0.93 Turnover intention 0.97

MEAN SD 5.35 3.06 5.56 4.37 5.36 3.38 4.96 3.06

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

0.93 0.728 0.89 −0.473 1.02 0.666 1.02 0.350 0.85 0.336 0.70 0.248 1.10 0.293 1.37 −0.138

0.681 −0.327 0.802 −0.072 0.212 0.670 −0.337 0.443 −0.050 0.649 −0.283 0.194 0.200 0.243 Formative −0.112 0.303 0.155 0.237 0.719 0.840 0.156 −0.133 −0.229 −0.051 −0.719 −0.583 0.938

AVE square root on the diagonal.

Table A2 Discriminant validity for sample ‘programmers’

CR 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Openness 0.88 Neuroticism 0.83 Agreeableness 0.89 Extraversion 0.88 Conscientiousness 0.90 Job satisfaction Formative Organizational commitment 0.94 Turnover intention 0.96

MEAN 5.31 3.23 5.53 3.93 5.26 3.29 4.82 3.09

SD

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

0.80 0.712 0.89 −0.381 0.711 0.75 0.596 −0.465 0.736 1.04 0.168 −0.082 0.050 0.769 0.91 0.616 −0.444 0.581 0.019 0.77 0.118 −0.238 0.183 −0.133 1.32 0.197 −0.258 0.238 −0.110 1.34 0.156 0.116 0.027 0.175

0.746 0.122 Formative 0.219 0.824 0.845 0.066 −0.693 −0.572 0.932

AVE square root on the diagonal.

Table A3 Discriminant validity for sample ‘system engineers’

CR 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Openness 0.88 Neuroticism 0.83 Agreeableness 0.87 Extraversion 0.88 Conscientiousness 0.81 Job satisfaction Formative Organizational commitment 0.94 Turnover intention 0.96

MEAN SD 5.58 2.99 5.67 4.27 5.49 3.29 4.80 3.15

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

0.80 0.695 0.73 −0.104 0.71 0.383 0.97 0.296 0.76 0.355 0.72 0.142 1.39 0.202 1.34 −0.050

0.670 −0.513 0.681 −0.171 0.293 0.774 −0.382 0.462 0.101 0.677 −0.219 0.176 0.275 −0.242 Formative −0.262 0.223 0.276 −0.090 0.809 0.845 0.177 −0.049 −0.181 0.197 −0.722 −0.683 0.932

AVE square root on the diagonal.

Table A4 Discriminant validity for sample ‘system administrators’

CR 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Openness 0.8648 Neuroticism 0.8289 Agreeableness 0.8493 Extraversion 0.8616 Conscientiousness 0.8724 Job satisfaction Formative Organizational commitment 0.9474 Turnover intention 0.9533

MEAN SD 5.35 3.00 5.68 4.11 5.47 3.19 4.67 3.25

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

0.74 0.695 0.86 −0.118 0.71 0.359 1.00 0.146 0.85 0.267 0.75 −0.205 1.31 −0.028 1.25 0.096

0.703 −0.482 0.671 0.001 0.012 0.715 −0.531 0.435 0.079 0.732 −0.075 0.099 −0.172 0.096 Formative −0.059 0.139 −0.003 0.099 0.697 0.867 0.274 −0.189 0.090 −0.254 −0.731 −0.626 0.914

AVE square root on the diagonal.

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

65
Table A5 Factor loadings Table A6 Weights

Items OPEN-1 OPEN-2 OPEN-3 OPEN-4 OPEN-5 OPEN-6 OPEN-7 OPEN-8 EXTRA-1 EXTRA-2 EXTRA-3 EXTRA-4 EXTRA-5 EXTRA-6 EXTRA-7 EXTRA-8 AGREE-1 AGREE-2 AGREE-3 AGREE-4 AGREE-5 AGREE-6 AGREE-7 AGREE-8 NEURO-1 NEURO-2 NEURO-3 NEURO-4 NEURO-5 NEURO-6 NEURO-7 NEURO-8 CONS-1 CONS-2 CONS-3 CONS-4 CONS-5 CONS-6 CONS-7 CONS-8 TINT-1 TINT-2 TINT-3 TINT-4 OC-1 OC-2 OC-3 OC-4 OC-5 OC-6

IT Programmers System System consultants engineers administrators 0.5598 0.8369 0.8042 0.7393 0.7349 0.6243 0.6436 0.7933 0.6256 0.8485 0.4728 0.5313 0.7846 0.7624 0.7038 0.6917 0.6984 0.7624 0.6806 0.7255 0.8453 0.886 0.6836 0.401 0.877 0.763 0.7715 0.7921 0.733 0.7215 0.8751 0.8485 0.5915 0.5221 0.6491 0.8183 0.6018 0.7073 0.6232 0.8451 0.7684 0.8188 0.9448 0.9383 0.9513 0.8944 0.8204 0.7825 0.9058 0.8818 0.8523 0.8186 0.5698 0.6251 0.7489 0.7552 0.7353 0.7515 0.7876 0.5436 0.5946 0.8204 0.8749 0.6538 0.8796 0.6484 0.8621 0.6697 0.7022 0.6324 0.5778 0.6698 0.6532 0.6189 0.7682 0.6466 0.6903 0.6503 0.6316 0.8112 0.6259 0.5655 0.7975 0.5373 0.9474 0.944 0.9303 0.9052 0.8054 0.7986 0.9136 0.8808 0.8972 0.7656 0.5936 0.7774 0.8054 0.5799 0.5788 0.6391 0.836 0.7864 0.7153 0.6311 0.6802 0.6743 0.7871

Items JS-1 JS-2 JS-3 JS-4 JS-5 JS-6 JS-7 JS-8 JS-9 JS-10 JS-11

IT Programmers consultants 0.103 0.223 0.27 0.124 −0.335 0.178 0.148 0.206 −0.088 0.292 0.011 0.272 0.229 0.303 0.098 0.077 0.067 0.238 0.014 −0.022 0.129 −0.036

System engineers 0.166 0.354 0.52 −0.189 0.095 −0.052 0.241 0.132 0.018 −0.059 −0.037

System administrators 0.144 0.342 0.637 0.276 −0.023 0.222 0.059 −0.052 −0.125 0.171 −0.279

0.8713 0.8554 0.6392 0.8253 0.7927 0.8058 0.6778 0.7759 0.5916 0.6668 0.5287 0.811 0.6038 0.6735 0.7103 0.6933 0.5572 0.5672 0.9213 0.9443 0.9693 0.9142 0.7691 0.7978 0.9164 0.8947 0.9001 0.7434

0.6763 0.6245 0.5557 0.7705 0.5594 0.7993 0.6709 0.688 0.5866

Table A7 Classification of categories to broad job types

Broad IT job type IT consultant

Initial job categories IT consultant; system consultant; security specialist; system analyst; web developer; IS project manager; IS auditor, IS security advisor Programmer; programmer analyst; software programmer System engineer; applications engineer; network architect; network engineer; software engineer; system architect; systems software engineer; system designer; software quality assurance analyst System administrator; database administrator; help desk technician; network system administrator; support specialist; administrator; web administrator; technical specialist, webmaster

Programmer
0.7705 0.6914 0.7634 0.8364 0.6291 0.7391 0.7686 0.7574 0.6363 0.9094 0.9178 0.9401 0.8901 0.8108 0.7584 0.9181 0.8821 0.9275 0.8907

System engineer

System administrator

Effect of personality on IT personnel’s job-related attitudes

A Eckhardt et al

66
Table A8 IT job type descriptions

Tasks Job description: IT consultants
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

Meet with clients to determine requirements Work with clients to deﬁne the scope of a project Plan timescales and the resources needed Clarify a client’s system speciﬁcations and understanding their work practices Liaising with staff at all levels of a client organization Deﬁne software, hardware and network requirements Analyze it requirements within companies and giving independent advice Develop agreed solutions and implementing new systems Present solutions in written or oral reports Help clients with change-management activities

Job description: programmers
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

Correct errors by making appropriate changes and then rechecking the program Conduct trial runs of programs and software applications Compile and write documentation of program development and subsequent revisions Write, update, and maintain computer programs or software packages Consult managerial, engineering, and technical personnel to clarify program intent Perform or direct revision, repair, or expansion of existing programs Write, analyze, review, and rewrite programs, using workﬂow chart and diagram Write or contribute to instructions or manuals to guide end users Investigate whether networks are responding to a program’s instructions Prepare detailed workﬂow charts and diagrams that describe input and output

Job description: system engineers
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

Create concepts and architectures for innovative infotainment systems Design and reﬁne the system, software requirements and its implementation Deﬁne the network and communication concepts with customer and software team Develop and communicate the software architecture Drive the software team in design, development and integration activities Manage and monitor LAN/WAN network services Recommend and acquire equipment replacements and upgrades Maintain an inventory of all network devices Tracking and reporting system capacity (CPU, memory, disk space, etc.) Installing software upgrades and security patches, and monitoring for intrusion signs

Job description: system administrators
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

Diagnose hardware and software problems, and replace defective components Perform data backups and disaster recovery operations Maintain and administer computer networks and related computing environments Plan, coordinate, and implement network security measures in order to protect data Operate master consoles in order to monitor the performance of computer systems Perform routine network startup and shutdown procedures, maintain control record Design, conﬁgure, and test computer hardware, and software Recommend changes to improve systems and network conﬁgurations Confer with network users about how to solve existing system problems Monitor network performance

