Journal of Information Technology (2016) 31, 250–253 358–381 ª 2016 Association for Information Technology Trust All rights reserved 0268-3962/16 Multiple interests or unified voice? JE Ferguson and M Soekijad 4
www.palgrave.com/journals

Research Article

Multiple interests or uniﬁed voice? Online communities as intermediary spaces for development
Julie E Ferguson1, Maura Soekijad2
1 2

Department of Organization Sciences, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Information, Logistics and Innovation, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Correspondence: JE Ferguson, Department of Organization Sciences, VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Abstract While the uptake of online communities toward development purposes continues to grow, many are characterized by an unresolved tension. On the one hand, they beneﬁt from participation of heterogeneous stakeholders in their efforts to strengthen their expertise. On the other hand, these stakeholders represent highly diverging interests, which makes collective strategic action very challenging. To understand how online communities cope with this tension, we conducted a longitudinal, mixed method case study of an online community focused on development transportation. We argue that online communities are uniquely equipped, through their ﬂuidity and open-endedness, to enable knowledge creation and agenda-setting. In so doing, online communities afford an ‘intermediary space’ that simultaneously accommodates both convergence and divergence of interests. Our study strengthens the bridge between information systems research and development studies, by highlighting the potential of ICT uptake toward ‘remaking participation’ in development debate, while including the perspectives of heterogeneous interest groups. Journal of Information Technology (2016) 31, 358–381.doi:10.1057/jit.2015.25; advance online publication, 15 December 2015 Keywords: online communities; development; intermediary spaces; interests; ICT4D; strategic framing

F

Introduction or many professionals in the ﬁeld of development cooperation, an ongoing challenge is how to comprehend distinct, context-speciﬁc development problems, and integrating these in more relevant practice and policy agendas. This challenge is confounded by on the one hand, the complexity of development problems, which calls for close collaboration between dispersed and heterogeneous development stakeholders, ranging from local practitioners to international donors (Rossi, 2004; McFarlane, 2006; Watkins et al., 2012). On the other hand, these stakeholders often represent unequal, contested, and widely diverging interests (Puri, 2007; Cornwall, 2008). Understanding how development efforts can be better aligned, while simultaneously ensuring that the voices of particular interest groups are represented in development agenda-setting, is therefore of key signiﬁcance toward realizing more effective development cooperation (Escobar, 2011; Contu and Girei, 2014).

An important, yet under-recognized development domain in which such questions are manifested, is development transportation and infrastructure. For instance, without access to transportation or adequate infrastructure, farmers cannot bring their products to markets, women experiencing childbirth problems cannot access healthcare, and children cannot reach their schools. Indeed, without forms of transportation or appropriate infrastructure, many key development goals1 such as poverty reduction, reducing maternal mortality, and increasing access to education cannot be realized. Thus, while transportation underlies every development theme, in and of itself it often remains implicit (Njoh, 2008; Mitiku, 2009). The case underlying this paper shows how a heterogeneous group of development professionals struggled in their attempt to agendize equitable access to transportation as a development priority, joining forces across organizational and geographical boundaries by way of an online community.

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 359

Online communities are particularly useful where relevant partners are geographically dispersed, but need to work together to realize challenges that are too complex to combat unilaterally (Amin and Cohendet, 2004), as in the development context. As a user-friendly, low-tech, and low-cost means of communications, online communities are easily initiated, making it possible for individuals to mobilize and extend their networks, without ﬁrst having to seek organizational commitment (Kane et al., 2014). Online platforms enable the formation of ﬂexible networks of various stakeholders, such as practitioners and policymakers, working from heterogeneous perspectives toward a shared policy interest (Puri, 2007; Waters et al., 2009). In this study we focus on online communities as particular online setting. These are collectives of dispersed, often unfamiliar individuals, interacting around a shared interest while using information and communication technologies (Faraj et al., 2011). Two speciﬁc features potentially inﬂuence behavior in online communities. The ﬁrst is their ﬂuidity, which refers to the constant change in boundaries, norms, interactions, and foci of online communities (Kane et al., 2009; Schreyögg and Sydow, 2010; Faraj et al., 2011). The second feature is their open-ended nature, manifested through a lack of predetermined governance structure, and engagement and disengagement of participants as and when it suits them (Blanchard and Markus, 2004; O’Mahony and Bechky, 2008). These two features affect both the social dynamics and content of online communities, affording on the one hand, more versatile spaces for debate to emerge than ofﬂine contexts would generally accommodate. On the other hand, these features also suggest opportunistic, non-committal participation: if the content and direction of an online community does not directly serve an individual’s interest, it is unclear what drives them to continue to engage with the community (Wasko and Faraj, 2005). Development scholars engaged in the role of information and communication technology for development (ICT4D) seem divided over the effectiveness of online communities as vehicle for development. Some authors primarily recognize the open and inclusive potential of online communities (Hayes and Walsham, 2001; Wagner et al., 2003; Chigona et al., 2009), increasing the heterogeneity of the participants (Puri, 2007). Other authors caution that online communities as a form of ICT in fact amplify inherent societal inequalities, for instance by further marginalizing those without access to online means (Madon et al., 2009; Heeks, 2010). Rather than taking sides in this debate, in this paper we aim to explain how online communities potentially serve as a medium to accommodate a gradual development process, through ﬂuid networks and interrelations (Williams, 2004). In this processoriented perspective, development interests are contested and negotiated in a constantly shifting arena of engagement between participants (Gaventa, 2004: 73). We increase understanding of the role of online communities toward representing the voices of particular interest groups, while simultaneously yielding more aligned development efforts, both of which are of key signiﬁcance toward realizing more effective development (Escobar, 2011; Contu and Girei, 2014). We present an in-depth case study of a particular online community in the ﬁeld of development transportation and infrastructure, which we call ‘GRIT’ (a pseudonym and acronym, referring to its main interests in Gender, Rural Infrastructural and Transportation). The case underlying this

paper was selected because of its heterogeneous development participants, whose sole means of exchange as a community was the online forum. It shows how they struggled in their attempt to develop a shared strategic agenda across organizational and geographical boundaries, and how they joined forces around the topic of equitable access to transportation as a development priority. Through four vignettes, we develop a theoretical framework that explains how the online community was able to perform effectively as ‘intermediary space,’ thereby accommodating multiple, heterogeneous interests simultaneously. The paper is structured as follows. We ﬁrst introduce existing views on online communities, connecting these to the development context, and in particular the concept of ‘spaces’ for the expression of interests. We then explain the research approach and methods chosen for this study, after which we present our main ﬁndings. We conclude with a discussion on the theoretical and practical implications of our ﬁndings, in particular related to the use of information and communication technologies as affording ‘intermediary spaces’ for development. Theoretical background Development relates to people’s capacity and freedom to autonomously pursue their interests and to satisfy their basic human needs (Sen, 1999; Walsham et al., 2007). This relates to both material dimensions (i.e., economic growth and physical sustainability), and non-material dimensions (i.e., social and political well-being) (Madon, 2000). Given the individual needs and opportunities underlying development, it is evident that what constitutes ‘development’ is in fact a highly contested debate on the inclusion and exclusion of voices in agenda-setting (Escobar, 2011). Indeed, the drive toward more inclusive or ‘participatory’ development practice and agendasetting constitutes a key development debate (Cooke and Kothari, 2001; Hickey and Mohan, 2004). With the growing uptake of information and communication technologies toward development purposes, this debate has become all the more vocal due to the potential often ascribed to such technologies toward reducing inequalities (Walsham et al., 2007; Unwin, 2009). Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) are an intrinsic component of development, for at least two reasons. First, many development challenges are too complex and costly to resolve unilaterally, and call for collaborative approaches between non-governmental organizations (NGOs), donors, local beneﬁciaries and grassroots representatives, social entrepreneurs and policymakers (Ferguson, forthcoming). To facilitate collaboration between such a diverse and geographically dispersed range of partners, ICTenabled communication is indispensable (Watson-Mannheim et al., 2012). Second, development is aimed at reducing inequalities, by strengthening people’s capacity to engage more fully in their own development processes (Powell, 2006). In line with this aim, some scholars argue that ICT represents a possibility for people to carve out their own ‘spaces’ for change (Heeks, 2008; Zheng, 2009). This has led to a thriving debate on ‘ICT for development’ or ‘ICT4D,’ which forefronts ICT as an important enabler of social transformation and development (Walsham et al., 2007; Avgerou, 2008; Hayes and Westrup, 2012; Ferguson

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

360 4

et al., 2013). However, in this capacity ICT represents a double-edged sword. On the one hand, it can aggravate inequalities, because people excluded from access to technology are also excluded from critical sources of information (Venkatesh and Sykes, 2013). On the other hand, ICT is also recognized as enabling the emergence of countervailing power to dominant development stakeholders (Taylor, 2007; Cornwall, 2008), in the form of self-mobilized ‘counternetworks’ (Castells, 1996; Mosse and Sahay, 2003; Braa et al., 2004). This is also true for online communities, as particular setting in which individuals need to be intrinsically motivated to engage toward a purpose shared by at least part of the community (Wasko and Faraj, 2005). In the development context, online communities are sometimes convened as a form of ‘invited’ participatory space to debate pre-deﬁned topics, framed by the conveners (Cornwall, 2008). Such spaces are often purpose-driven toward policy objectives and often regulated by government or international agencies, bringing together people with particular interests and responsibilities in a structured manner (Cornwall, 2004, 2008; Gaventa, 2004). Alternatively, online communities sometimes emerge in a more bottom-up manner of participation, representing a form of informal space to explore topics of shared interests (Eversole, 2010). In such spaces, participation is self-mobilized by individuals, who sometimes engage in collective action toward common objectives within the realm of civil society (Gaventa, 2004; Puri, 2007; Cornwall, 2008). In this paper we will explore a potential link between invited and self-mobilized spaces in the context of online communities, and representing a form of ‘intermediary space’. We draw on Cornwall and Coelho’s (2007) conceptualization of intermediary spaces as ‘conduits for negotiation, information and exchange,’ and which represent ‘spaces of contestation as well as collaboration, into which heterogeneous participants bring diverse interpretations of participation and democracy and divergent agendas’ (Cornwall and Coelho, 2007: 1). Several scholars recognize the need for combining invited and self-mobilized spaces in order to access valuable resources and support. For instance, some refer to the need to ‘traverse’ between the spaces and ‘translate’ one’s needs into the language of others, and to align bureaucratic forms and goals (Eversole, 2010; Buckwalter, 2014). Prior studies of ICTenabled social transformation have also yielded important contributions by analyzing the role of intermediary agents (Heeks, 2002; Molla and Heeks, 2007) and intermediary institutions (Madon, 2000), functioning as ‘translation agents’ (Eversole, 2010) between invited and self-mobilized spaces. In online settings, the boundaries between invited and selfmobilized spaces are ﬂuid, determined by those who participate in them: ‘while a frame might be set by outsiders, much then depends on who participates and where their agency and interests take things’ (Cornwall, 2008: 276). Thus, what originated as invited space, might over time be transformed into an arena for self-mobilized interests – or vice versa. We seek to understand how online communities ﬂuctuate between invited and self-mobilized online spaces, enabling the emergence of intermediary space (Gigler, 2014). In so doing, we seek to answer the research question: how can online communities accommodate heterogeneous interests, toward shared strategic action? Given the ﬂuidity and open-endedness of online communities, as discussed in the introduction, we argue that online

communities are uniquely equipped to accommodate the heterogeneous interests of both invited and self-mobilized communities – sometimes even simultaneously. We show how online communities, created as spaces for change with a particular purpose in mind, can in fact be transformed by those who engage in them, toward something quite different (Cornwall, 2004: 81). Our analysis revealed that online communities can function as intermediary spaces through two interrelated practices, namely knowledge sharing and agendasetting, thereby simultaneously accommodating heterogeneous interests. In fact, we argue that these two practices together afford strategic action in online communities. We identiﬁed four manifestations of intermediary space in online communities. Our conceptualization of these spaces, as described in the ﬁndings, is the result of an iterative process of bringing empirical patterns into dialogue with theory. With our study we respond to the call for participation addressed ‘from both sides of the equation’ (Gaventa, 2004: 27), showing how online communities potentially serve as a medium for generating multi-directional spaces in which people ‘become participants in other people’s processes’ (Eversole, 2010: 37). Namely, online communities can extend beyond participatory spaces as either invited or self-mobilized spaces for debate, by potentially representing new, intermediary ‘spaces for heterogeneous stakeholders to “participate” together’ (Eversole, 2010: 37). We thereby engage with perspectives on development as a gradual process, comprising ﬂuid networks and interrelations (Williams, 2004). In this process-orientated perspective, interests are contested and negotiated in a constantly shifting arena of engagement in relation to one another (Gaventa, 2004: 37). By showing how this process occurs, we further long-standing efforts to ‘remake participation’ (Hickey and Mohan, 2004; Eversole, 2010), from a more pluralist approach to power (Gaventa, 2004). Methods Research setting and case description To understand how heterogeneous stakeholders collaborate online toward joint policy agendas, we studied a community with a focus on transportation and infrastructure. The community is referred to as ‘GRIT’ (a pseudonym and acronym, referring to its main interests in Gender, Rural Infrastructural and Transportation or ‘GRIT’). The theme of transportation and infrastructure is a critical enabler for development: namely, the ability to fulﬁl basic human needs – such as access to education, to sustainable livelihoods, to healthcare – often depends on people’s mobility (Howe and Richards, 1984; Tolley and Turton, 1995; Banjo et al., 2012). Transportation and infrastructure are a priority theme for international, multilateral agencies and development banks (Multilateral Development Banks, 2015), with vast investments in infrastructural projects such as highways or transportation systems. However, their predominant focus on modernization and automobility has in some cases been shown to aggravate rather than reduce poverty: for instance, in efforts to reduce trafﬁc or enhance road safety, some cities have banned non-motorized vehicles, with signiﬁcant impact on those whose livelihoods depend on such modes (Buliung et al., 2014:154). Thus, some argue that smaller-scale projects

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 361

are more likely to generate development impact: after all, in developing contexts, many people rely on non-motorized forms of transportation, and are better served by secondary roads, improved transportation security, and more efﬁcient rural-urban mobility (Vasconcellos, 2013; Buliung et al., 2014). Clearly, there is much to be gained through stronger alignment of transportation policy with local needs, and stronger linkages with other sectors (Banjo et al., 2012). The community central to our case study was selected through theoretical sampling, from a list of online communities that was compiled from responses (n = 246) to a descriptive survey we issued among approximately 1200 international development practitioners and policymakers with an interest in knowledge management and ICT for development. The selected community was active, and characterized as highly heterogeneous in terms of participants (ranging from rural practitioners to high-level policymakers), organizational and geographical representation. At the time of our analysis, the community comprised around 250 members with wide-ranging interests, including rural transport, health, education, services delivery, sustainable development, safety, time poverty, and representing local and international NGOs, research institutes, multilateral and bilateral aid agencies, development banks, network organizations, and independent consultants, based in a variety of Western and developing countries around the world. The community provided us with full access to its members and online message archive, and had a history comprising 7 active years of online activity, enabling us to perceive how it evolved over time. Participants communicated exclusively via a free and open-source online platform, which also served as a message and document archive. In order to understand the social mechanisms underlying community exchanges, we used the messages shared via the online platform as our main unit of analysis. Research design and analysis We conducted an in-depth case study (Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007), combining qualitative methods of data collection and analysis with quantitative methods to verify and extend our ﬁndings, thereby strengthening our theory building through triangulation of analytical methods (Venkatesh et al., 2013). Our qualitative study consisted of an inductive, interpretive approach (Walsham, 2006; Gioia et al., 2013), which is appropriate to our purpose and ﬁt to a nascent state of the literature (Edmondson and McManus, 2007). We chose one case to enable sufﬁcient depth, based on the large data sample that stretched over 2004–2011 (Flyvbjerg, 2006; Langley et al., 2013). Prior to the study, the authors were not familiar with the community. Thus, to get better acquainted with its background and aims, we reviewed relevant archival material
Table 1 Vignettes and samples

(community evaluations, relevant websites, etc.). We also interviewed key informants, including the community moderator (based in London, interviewed twice); two active members (one based in Tanzania, interviewed twice, and one in the UK); a former facilitator (based in India); and one policy ofﬁcer interested in the community (based in the US). The main body of data we analyzed was the set of messages shared on the platform that served as a distribution list enabling discussion, resource sharing, and message archiving. Over the course of our study, the functionality of the platform remained constant (some minor technical updates notwithstanding). Further, as the community did not convene ofﬂine, it can be assumed that the vast majority of communications among community members occurred via the platform. Using those messages as data, we acted as passive members in a non-intrusive manner (described by Hine, 2005; and Czarniawska, 2007). From the overall body of (14.193) messages, we selected the most active discussions, represented as (6.631) threaded messages. We then coded the data interpretively using Atlas.ti software (85.431 text lines yielding 1.431 quotes). This process of data extraction and coding was conducted in an iterative fashion, allowing us to constantly reﬁne the dataset and the related codes. Our elaborate coding procedure helped us to develop a comprehensive understanding of the community, how it established its objectives, and how it sought to pursue strategic action despite heterogeneous interests. This was manifested through four vignettes, each including recurring, overarching discussions (summarized in Table 1) throughout the community’s most active life span, between 2004 and 2009. These vignettes disclosed how the communications taking place shaped and modiﬁed the online community in terms of its characterization as an ‘invited’ vs ‘self-mobilized’ space, and helped us better understand what happened when there are multiple interests in online communities. We conceptualized the results of the interpretive analysis in a data structure (presented in the Discussion section (Figure 6), and detailed in Appendix A), following the process described by Gioia et al. (2013). To better understand how the different discussions emerged and subsided, we also conducted a quantitative semantic analysis2 of the contents of the four vignettes. Semantic analysis calculates textual patterns based on frequency analysis and co-occurrence of words. Semantic networks are comprised of words with high correlations to one another. Visually, this means that words often used in conjunction with one another are close to one another, and the size of nodes manifests their frequency of usage. Thus, word clusters are useful to quantitatively extract different core frames from a body of text, and to show which key terms they are comprised of. Each of the semantic networks visualized and explained below represents these core frames, identiﬁed through statistical reliability analyses of the core frames (detailed in Appendix B).

Vignette 1. Gender-oriented transport policy 2. Transport and development practice 3. Toward equitable transport 4. The future of GRIT

Period May–December 2004 May–July 2005 March–May 2006 December 2009–May 2010

Messages 128 174 262 68

Text lines 6.579 8.629 16.081 3.335

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

362 4

To complete our analysis, we compared the outcomes of the (qualitative) interpretive and (quantitative) semantic analyses. In so doing, we were able to understand and visualize (through network analytic methods) how the online community was able to accommodate different, simultaneous core frames, ﬂuctuating in its functionality as invited and self-mobilized space, depending on the direction that subsets of participants determined. We present our ﬁndings in the following case study. Findings We empirically identiﬁed that the community ﬂuctuated in terms of its representation, as invited and self-mobilized space (visualized in the timeline in Figure 1). In fact, this ﬂuctuation made it possible for the community to accommodate multiple core frames simultaneously, which manifested the community’s embodiment as intermediary space. We zoomed in on four discussions within the community to show how this ﬂuctuation occurred, whereby the community ﬁrst originated as invited space, incentivized by an external driver. Second, the community increasingly manifested characteristics as selfmobilized space, oriented toward knowledge creation and participants’ local interests. Third, the community sought to draw on this knowledge toward permeating invited spaces, manifesting (temporary) alignment between institutional and local interests. Fourth, policy interests sought to invite the community toward a different direction altogether, but received little resonance to their efforts. Although this led to a decline in strategic action within the community, it also showed the boundaries of the community’s ﬂuidity, and participants’ orientation toward spaces beyond the community. The four vignettes presented below show how this ﬂuctuation occurred. 1. The community as invited space: setting a gender-oriented transport policy agenda The online community emerged following a workshop convened by policy specialists working on transport and
Vignette 1 drivers for strategic action strategic framing external opportunities Vignette 2 internal drivers

infrastructure, within an inﬂuential multilateral development agency (‘MDA,’ a pseudonym). The workshop was aimed at gathering innovative perspectives on transport and infrastructure, toward a possible revision of MDA’s transportation policy. The 25 initial participants represented both research and practice domains, interested in diverse development foci, and also included local representatives from countries including Bangladesh, China, Laos, Lesotho, Peru, Senegal, South Africa, Uganda, and Vietnam. Following the workshop, participants decided to continue their exchange online, recognizing what one practitioner described recognized as ‘a golden opportunity … [to] keep the interaction between us going … and to open the forum for sharing experiences, discussing and debating ideas [with] other people working on gender and on transport issues’ (9th July 2004). Convened by MDA, the community comprised an ‘invited space,’ with discussions primarily focusing on MDA policy interests in transportation and development. Participants eagerly seized the opportunity to forge allegiance with one another in their engagement with MDA, as many of them (directly or indirectly) depended on MDA in terms of policy and funding. Therefore, discussions soon evolved into what one consultant described as an effort to ‘integrate gender into any ongoing consideration of the links between poverty reduction [strategies] … and Transport Policy’ (3rd July 2004). This gender orientation on transport policy initially provided a shared interest for the development specialists to engage with one another, but incrementally fanned out toward exploring how different facets of MDA’s policy orientation corresponded to their own. For instance, one active participant argued that there was more to be gained by focusing on rural accessibility, rather than a broad focus on transportation and infrastructure as promoted by MDA: ‘Especially in the stricken areas, stone-paved roads [are] a good way to achieve rural accessibility [and have] beneﬁcial impacts … in the social and economic environment of poor rural populations’ (2nd August 2004). Some advocated instead for more prominent health-oriented research, and others for

Vignette 3 internal drivers / external opportunities

Vignette 4

--

+ institutional - community +/- local

- institutional +/- community + local

+ institutional + community + local

+/- institutional - community - local

community response time line

community as invited space

community as selfmobilized space

permeating invited spaces

beyond community spaces

May-Dec ‘04 core frame

May-July ‘05

Mar-May ‘06

Dec ‘09-May ‘10

1. Gender oriented transport policy health ICT gender

2. Transport & development practices

2. Gender & transport policy

3. Toward equitable transport services rural access

4. The future of GRIT sustainable environment

gender oriented transport policy

gender gender oriented transport policy

Figure 1 Time line of community engagement.

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 363

sharing infrastructural techniques. Thus, the community interests increasingly diversiﬁed. Comparing the qualitative results to the semantic analysis (visualized in Figure 2), we found similar results. We identiﬁed four simultaneous core frames, based on clusters of cooccurring words on the forum. Two of the core frames represent policy-related interests. The ﬁrst (blue nodes) represents an orientation toward stakeholder participation (‘civil,’ ‘society,’ ‘bank,’ ‘MDA,’ ‘participation’) in policy contexts (‘PRSP,’3 ‘MDG’), while the fourth (purple nodes) indicates a thematic policy-orientation ( (‘HIV,’ ‘gender,’ ‘equality’). In contrast, the other core frames represent local interests: core frame 2 (yellow nodes) is more oriented toward local level development (‘water,’ ‘time,’ ‘household’), while core frame 3 (red nodes) reﬂects technical and operational aspects (‘technology,’ ‘tools’). At the same time, several overarching community interests materialized around gender, transportation, and development (manifested prominently by the central grey nodes, connected to all the core frames). In sum, this vignette clearly shows the community’s origins manifested as an invited space around MDA’s institutional

policy interests, but it also revealed an emerging orientation toward knowledge sharing around heterogeneous local interests. In fact, self-mobilization and divergence of interests became increasingly pronounced, as we show in the second vignette. 2. The community as self-mobilized space: sharing knowledge toward transport and development practices, gender and transport policy Incrementally, participants moved away from the initial focus initiated by MDA, and began to reshape the community as a space to express and pursue their local interests, while simultaneously engaging with a range of policy interests beyond MDA’s. Indeed, these multiple interests became stronger in the community, and participants actively sought to mobilize a more diversiﬁed membership, as a means to further strengthen their knowledge base, suggesting for instance: ‘If we can ﬁnd a way to tempt in people with backgrounds that extend beyond the usual limits of the traditionally dominant ﬁelds […], I think we would be able to make real progress.’

Figure 2 Semantic analysis vignette 1.

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

364 4

Figure 3 Semantic analysis vignette 2.

However, their struggle to pitch different interests evoked some interesting internal tensions among subsets of participants, related in particular to which interests should be prioritized. These were wide-ranging, including among others socio-cultural dimensions (such as girls’ safety, participation in social interaction), practical solutions (such as toolkits, concrete solutions), access to basic needs (such as health services, education, information), and human rights. At the same time, some participants recognized that to succeed in their individual and shared policy projects, they also needed to converge around a speciﬁc strategic position, in order to beneﬁt from their collective potential. One participant emphasized: ‘We are – like it or not – a Self-Organizing Collaborative Network, and while each of us has a role to play in this, the trick is to let our collective intelligence do its work … to advance a common agenda’ (30th May 2005). Thus, subgroups emerged around simultaneously debated core frames, which reﬂected both shared and diverging interests in research themes, concrete projects, and policy pursuits. These were roughly aligned toward on the one hand, gender and transport policy, which emphasized the need for an explicit gender dimensions in transport policy. However, in response, participants also expressed their ‘problem with gender and transport [… related to the] whats, hows and whys of the speciﬁc gender issue in the ﬁeld of transport –

almost immediately a much larger societal problematique opens up [… which] goes very far indeed’ (24th July 2005). This line of debate therefore evoked, on the other hand an emphasis on transport and development practice, with accessibility as a critical enabler of international development. The semantic analysis of these exchanges (Figure 3) shows that the community discussions intensiﬁed around overarching core frames (manifested by the increase of grey nodes). Within these broad debates, ‘gender’ orientations were more closely aligned to local interests (yellow nodes in core frame 4, e.g. ‘poor,’ ‘time’) and to policy integration (purple nodes in core frame 5, e.g. ‘mainstreaming,’ ‘policy’). In contrast, the broad ‘development’ orientation seemed to relate more to technical and operational aspects (red nodes in core frame 2, e.g. ‘tools,’ ‘technologies’), while ‘transport’ appears to resonate with the content of policy debate (‘infrastructure,’ ‘school,’ ‘MDG’). At the same time, the semantic analysis shows that debates fragmented: the ﬁve core frames are relatively distinct and dispersed, and core frame 3 (blue nodes), oriented toward stakeholder involvement (‘participation,’ ‘civil’) appears particularly detached from the other discussions. These core frames simultaneously comprised policy-related and local interests, while also building a shared community knowledge base, manifested by a new core frame around the content of policy (core frame 1, green nodes) (Figure 3).

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 365

In sum, this vignette showed a shift within the community as a self-mobilized space for debating and generating knowledge around diverging interests, while simultaneously seeking to establish its strategic positioning. A member of the GRIT secretariat concluded: ‘Through these discussions we can also see the potential for collaboration within the GRIT community on a number of issues … on which there seem to be parallel initiatives. By networking these initiatives we can strengthen their impact and ensure that we build upon rather than replicate learning’ (20th June 2005). Indeed, the collaborative potential was evidenced in the strategic action that followed, and whereby the community represented a constant ﬂuctuation of back and forth between invited and selfmobilized space, as we now show. 3. Permeating invited spaces: setting the agenda toward equitable transport In the process of establishing a strong, self-mobilized knowledge base, the community became better equipped for strategic action. This became manifest after a senior policy ofﬁcer at MDA sent a message to the online community, inviting their expertise on a revised strategy document: ‘MDA’s strategy for the transport sector … is currently being reviewed by the Transport Division in order to respond to subsequent changes in policies and priorities for international development. [GRIT] is invited to contribute to this consultation. … However this is done, it should be independent of MDA, though some of our staff would be able to contribute to the discussion as [GRIT] members’ (21st March 2006). As a leading policy agency, MDA’s initiative entailed an emphasis on policy interests, but also represented a unique and critical opportunity for participants to agendize some of their local development interests. In fact, participants recognized that MDA had worldwide inﬂuence in the ﬁeld of development policy and practice, so promptly mobilized themselves to take up the opportunity, drawing on their shared resources. A subgroup of participants started by reviewing the draft provided by MDA, and actively sought input from the MDA representative on how they could most effectively frame a joint agenda. At the same time, others emphasized the need to seek diverging viewpoints on the subject matter, in order to push MDA’s strategy beyond the beaten path, and encourage a more open, participatory approach. For example, one participant replied: ‘We do not see this wonderful group project as aiming simply to inform and involve those working speciﬁcally on development and infrastructure agendas, but feel that we should be aiming for a much broader audience. Perhaps if you all agree, we might already begin to rough out what these themes may be’ (5th April 2006). The community engaged in a heated debate, mobilizing its expert knowledge around a broad range of highly speciﬁc interests such as roadside sanitary facilities for women practicing purdah (seclusion); access to treatment of speciﬁc diseases (such as HIV/Aids or malaria); health disorders (such as obstetric ﬁstula) and ensuing social exclusion; different modes of transportation; the need for gender training; and so forth. The emphasis on local interests generated a framing struggle, leading the community astray from MDA’s invitation. Recognizing that they were jeopardizing the entire purpose of the consultation, a participant sought to re-align

the community toward a strategic orientation: ‘I am afraid that we are getting into quite a few battles here when it is the war we want to win. I have the idea that we might start to disperse our efforts and lose the focus that is vitally needed in the war of gender, rural infrastructure and transportation’ (25th April 2006). Participants recognized the need to strategically reposition themselves vis a vis the invitation extended by MDA, if they were to succeed in inﬂuencing its development policy with a strong and unambiguous argument. Ultimately, a group of ﬁve volunteers stepped forward to summarize the main points shared online, formulating their message to intersect with MDA’s aims, amending the draft strategy accordingly, in an online, transparent process. The community’s ﬁnal input brought together components of different interests, converging around equitable transport as a priority. Concretely, they provided to MDA a modiﬁed policy document including a new title, a new cover illustration, and a guideline comprising 10 action points to ensure the strategy was implementable. Indeed, the transportation strategy ultimately adopted by MDA drew many points from the proposed document, and compliments from senior representatives for the community’s contribution. The semantic analysis of this thread (Figure 4) is fairly revealing. Three of the four core frames (core frame 2, green nodes; core frame 3, blue nodes; and core frame 4, yellow nodes) are sparse, manifesting participants’ diverse interests. In fact, attention for local development stakeholders (core frame 3, blue nodes: ‘parity,’ ‘equity’) and local development issues (core frame 4, yellow nodes: ‘mobility,’ ‘project’) subsided, while the policy orientation is somewhat more prevalent (core frame 2, green nodes: ‘gender,’ ‘bank’). The core frames also show more overlap than the other segments we analyzed, revealing strong engagement between frames, many interrelated issues (grey nodes, connected to many different core frames), with the exception of core frame 3 (blue nodes), which is almost entirely disconnected from the others. However, core frame 1 (purple nodes: ‘process,’ ‘initiative,’ ‘step,’ ‘strategies’) revealed a strong processorientation rather than a topical theme, which had been overlooked in the interpretive analysis. This process-orientation revealed the strategic action taking place, whereby participants self-mobilized their heterogeneous interests to generate expert perspectives, and which enabled them to strategically inﬂuence the space MDA had invited them to engage in. In sum, MDA’s policy interests simultaneously provided an opportunity for participants to display and strengthen their local expertise, both individually and as a community. Moreover, while generating this knowledge, participants simultaneously engaged in a constructive process that led to the emergence of a shared interest in equitable transport, and aimed at strengthening the gender focus in international transportation policy. In other words, the struggle to align local and institutional interests created an intermediary space for the simultaneous manifestation of multiple core frames, in which local, community, and policy interests were able to ‘participate together’ (Eversole, 2010) in one another’s processes. 4. Spaces beyond the community: the future of GRIT The fourth vignette disclosed the limits to the community’s ﬂuidity and interests. Generally, membership numbers

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

366 4

Figure 4 Semantic analysis vignette 3.

remained fairly constant, but the frequency and intensity (number of threaded messages) of their interactions declined, and were mostly oriented toward information sharing (for instance about upcoming events or relevant publications), and for advice seeking toward individual members’ projects. In fact, institutional policy interests appeared to have shifted, in particular toward environmental sustainability, encouraged by the 2009 UN Climate Change conference, convened in Copenhagen (‘COP15’), as some members suggested. However, this strategic agenda was too far off from the community’s shared specialization, and participants lacked the drive to mobilize their shared knowledge through GRIT and to debate their active interests. Some participants sought to re-mobilize participants to reﬂect on the future of GRIT. One participant questioned: ‘I am rather curious why the conversations seem to have all but dried up. Is this because gender is now mainstreamed into all transport activity and there are no major issues we should be addressing? I would give ourselves a pat on the back if that were the case, but I suspect not. Are there other forums that have now taken over the discussion? If yes, what? Or is it that overwhelmed by

bigger issues such as that of climate change, we’ve all stopped advocating for gender equity in transport provision? ’ (30th December 2009). Falling on dry ground within the community, and coupled with a lack of institutional (external) policy interest, there was little selfmobilization, and a lack of engagement with invited spaces, rendering the community more or less invisible on the online forum. Our interpretive ﬁndings were corroborated by the semantic analysis (visualized in Figure 5), which shows ﬁve sparse core frames. Indeed, previously prominent words of transportation, development, and gender are fairly marginal. The local interests reﬂected in core frame 3 (yellow nodes) shows that ‘rural development’ became afﬁliated with the interest in ‘Copenhagen,’ that is related to climate change (rather than for instance gender or equitable transport). Core frame 4 (green nodes) reﬂects the interest in revitalizing the community (‘list’), and the focus on ‘gender’ as a policy priority; but this previously central topic is now marginal (reﬂected by a small node, at the edge of the semantic network). We found a subtle orientation toward local interests of

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 367

Figure 5 Semantic analysis vignette 4.

transportation (‘bike,’ ‘ﬁeld’) in core frame 2 (orange nodes), and local stakeholders in core frame 5 (blue nodes, ‘community’). In sum, GRIT incrementally lost its function as an intermediary space for shared knowledge creation and agenda-setting, and participants appeared to turn their interests elsewhere. In fact, at the time of this writing, some participants continue their efforts to mobilize the knowledge generated over the community’s life-span, toward new opportunities for agenda-setting. However, these efforts are mostly manifested through new online media such as Facebook, which may, when the opportunity arises, prove a new opportunity as an intermediary space for development debate – comprising an interesting topic for future research. Discussion Conceiving of online communities as intermediary spaces contributes to efforts aimed at ‘remaking participation’ (Eversole, 2010). In this perspective, participation is not simply about permeating invited spaces, in which dominant interests prevail, nor about mobilizing citizen-driven ‘claimed’ spaces for bottom-up change (Cornwall, 2008). Namely, the former favors explicit ownership of policy debate among administrators (bilateral or multilateral policy makers,

donor agencies, etc.), while the latter implies ‘bottom-up’ emergence among individual agents with shared interests, seeking to create new understandings of social change, and sometimes engaging in collective action toward common objectives (Puri, 2007; Eversole, 2010). While each of these processes is essential in terms of knowledge creation and agenda-setting, they disregard how technologies inﬂuence interactions among a wider range of institutional actors (Walsham et al., 2007: 319). In response to the call for a broader perspective on ICT4D research (ibid), we propose that online communities as intermediary spaces allow for stakeholders to become participants in one another’s processes, and in their own right, thereby contributing to a ‘participatory sphere’ (Cornwall and Coelho, 2007: 1) and comprising ‘new spaces for communities and organizations to “participate” together’ (Eversole, 2010: 37). So doing, we emphasize that knowledge is constructed as a process of negotiations among socially embedded and distributed actors, with expertise in different ﬁelds (Puri, 2007: 357). Indeed, there is increasing acknowledgment that development-speciﬁc problems call for context-speciﬁc expertise, which is, however, embedded in multiplex knowledge domains and perspectives, and therefore highly contested (Puri, 2007). In our case study, we analyzed how an online community focusing on development-speciﬁc transportation

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

368 4

accommodated these contested interests as an intermediary space for participation. Theoretically interpreting our ﬁndings, we identiﬁed three aggregated dimensions as our data structure (Figure 6) shows. First, drivers for strategic action within the community derived from internal and external sources. Internal drivers often related to sharing or generating knowledge, and to joint efforts at determining the community’s identity. External drivers often related to strategic opportunities within policy agencies, in terms of policy-inﬂuencing. These evoked strategic framing of their interests in relation to local and institutional (policy) interests within the community, or sometimes the interests of the community as a whole, and which yielded a community response in terms of convergence or divergence. These different conﬁgurations of drivers and focused interests yielded two interrelated community outcomes, of on the one hand knowledge creation, and on the other, agenda-setting. We analyzed the process through which these different dimensions together created intermediary spaces and integrated the outcomes of this analysis in a model (Figure 7). We now conceptually explain our model, addressing each of these dimensions in more detail. Drivers for strategic action Our model shows how participants were incentivized to engage in the online community through drivers for strategic action. These represent chances for strategically pursuing an issue of importance, and involve events or developments that participants recognize as having some consequence at either the level of individual stakeholders, or of a collective group (Maitlis and Lawrence, 2007). In line with prior studies (Gough and Shackley, 2001; Schreyögg and Sydow, 2010; Smelser and Marx, 2011), we found that heterogeneous participants were triggered to coalesce as a community through both internal drivers and external opportunities. Internal drivers often related to participants’ individual knowledge needs, deriving from their existing relationships in often invisible ofﬂine settings in which they were embedded (such as the wide-ranging interests detailed in the second vignette), or from their shared need to determine their strategic direction as a community (as the second vignette also illustrated, in the orientations toward both ‘transport and development practice’ and ‘gender and transport policy’). External drivers were often manifested through policy agenda-setting opportunities, such as the invitation to provide input in MDA’s new policy document (detailed in the third vignette). These drivers were an important component toward forming a tighter community rather than a loose aggregate of participants, in that they catalyzed a process of framing strategic agendas, as we now explain. Framing of strategic agendas ‘Framing’ is about guiding the perception and presentation of reality (Goffman, 1974; Benford and Snow, 2000), and represents an important practice to help actors strategically voice their interests (Buchanan and Dawson, 2007). These practices have also been described as ‘strategic framing’ (Fiss and Hirsch, 2005), which involves ‘the use of rhetorical devices in communication to mobilize support and minimize resistance to change’ (Cornelissen and Werner, 2014: 185). Indeed, strategic framing comprises an important dimension of

intermediary spaces, and involves community members as active agents, irrespective of their role in a relational hierarchy, rather than as passive ‘speakers-in-waiting,’ responding passively for invitations to communicate (ibid: 199). This proactive characteristic is an important difference in nuance, in the context of our research. Namely, the ﬂuidity inherent to self-organized online communities is, among others, manifested through its lack of formal structure in terms of its boundaries and interactions (Faraj et al., 2011). This enables strategic framing among (subsets of) heterogeneous participants, largely irrespective of their formal roles, or of hierarchical and organizational boundaries. Indeed, strategic framing is not only related to the content of messages, but also to the formation of a community among a ﬂuid and unstructured aggregate of participants. This makes it possible for participants to carve out their own space for engagement around complex, global issues toward a purpose that they themselves deem relevant at either institutional, local, or community levels, and sometimes all of these simultaneously. Important to note is that simultaneity was manifested in terms of the content of participants’ interests, but also in terms of their strategic level of engagement, related to both individual participants’ and collective community interests. In fact, recent research has emphasized that simultaneity is particularly pertinent in situations where the tension between ﬂuidity (‘evolvability’) and strategic action (‘stability’) is manifest (Wareham et al., 2014). Our study corroborates and extends this claim, by showing how simultaneity could actually be accommodated by the online community, rather than perceiving it as something that should be overcome, and which is important in view of its development aims of ‘remaking participation.’ Community response: temporary convergence of interests Our analysis of strategic agenda-setting showed that communities do not work in isolation, and emphasizes the need to take into account the reciprocal inﬂuence of externally embedded, local and institutional interests. This is an important point, because it emphasizes that inﬂuence cannot simply be imposed, but is impotent until it is activated, evoking a context of interdependency rather than dominance (LeclercqVandelannoitte, 2011). By looking at an online community as an open and ﬂuid space for debate, we emphasize the contestable nature of such spaces. Namely, communications represent a ﬂuid process whereby participants interchangeably converge and diverge around their particular or shared interests, deriving from both in- and outside of the community. Convergence is deﬁned as a tendency to move toward a common point of reference (Merriam-Webster dictionary), and occurs in online communities when multiple participants’ interests intersect, which allows them to engage in a shared debate. Convergence is often situated among subsets of actors, rather than an entire community (Faraj et al., 2011). ‘Although in a ﬂuid online community there is unlikely to be convergence about goals, processes, proposed solutions, or even evaluation criteria, there is likely to be temporary convergence around general topics, broad framing of the topics, generally appropriate uses of an idea, or a collective passion around which ideas are worth converging’ (ibid: 1229). In other words, convergence is temporary and partial in nature, and occurs interchangeably with

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 369
1st Order Concepts Knowledge sharing - Seeking expertise - Sharing knowledge - Joining forces Defining the community - Strategic positioning (identity processes) - Community boundaries Strategic opportunities - Initiatives for agenda setting - Access to funding - Leveraging expertise Institutionalizing policy interests - Policy implementation - Mainstreaming among stakeholders - Involvement with policy / funding agency Initiating policy engagement - Sharing policy-related knowledge - Sharing policy opportunities Unifying diverging interests toward agenda setting - (Efforts aimed at) influencing policy - Reacting against policy institutions - Discussing how to mainstream policy - Involving policy networks Building community knowledge - Sharing thematic information / resources - Sharing local examples Pursuing shared interests - Mobilizing the community - Seeking funding - Joint projects / initiatives Networking / fostering participation - Forging connections - Attracting new audiences - Fostering involvement Engaging diverging interests - Seeking heterogeneous participation - Debating diverging perspectives Developing local expertise - Seeking information in support of local projects - Personal communications Expressing local interests / supporting local activities - Local efforts to influence policy - Activities related to local projects Sharing / generating expertise - How to realize objectives AGENDA SETTING Framing of strategic agenda Community response Divergence KNOWLEDGE CREATION External drivers creating invited space 2nd Order Themes Aggregate Dimensions Outcome

Internal drivers creating selfmobilized space Drivers for strategic action

Institutional interests

Community interests

Local interests

Convergence

Policy pursuits - Identifying strategic opportunities - Agenda setting

Figure 6 Data structure.

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

370 4

policy External opportunities triggers Internal drivers local community leads to

convergence contributes to divergence

agenda setting INTERMEDIARY SPACE knowledge creation

drivers

strategic framing

community response

community outcome

Figure 7 Creating intermediary spaces in online communities.

divergence of interests. Divergence is deﬁned as a process of extending in different directions, or drawing apart from a common point (Merriam-Webster dictionary). In online communities, divergence is represented by simultaneous interests represented among different stakeholders, but with little or no mutual engagement between them (Haas, 1990; O’Mahony and Bechky, 2008). This social process of temporary convergence (Faraj et al., 2011) is a key feature of online communities, and can be seen as an ongoing continuum. Temporary convergence can lead to a more cohesive community, but can degrade and then possibly start over again when new opportunities for strategic action present themselves, as our case study illustrated. Nonetheless, it proved a highly constructive process toward realizing two distinct yet interrelated community outcomes, namely knowledge sharing and agenda-setting. Community outcomes: knowledge creation and agenda-setting As a knowledge-intensive sector – with knowledge-related questions at the heart of complex development challenges – many development organizations, from local NGOs to prominent multilateral agencies, are turning to online communities (Ferguson et al., 2010). Online communities are easily initiated and often openly available, making it possible for dispersed individuals to access knowledge and join forces toward realizing complex objectives, without ﬁrst having to seek organizational commitment. Thus, they allow participants to express, shape, and pursue their autonomous interests by sharing knowledge among a network of peers. At the same time, they can be an important source of expertise in policy debates, because they draw on a shared knowledge base of a wide range of stakeholders, thereby providing better-informed, stronger policy arguments (Haas, 1990; Amin and Cohendet, 2004; Haas, 2004). In other words, heterogeneity strengthens quality (Puri, 2007). Thus, divergence seemed to predominantly support knowledge creation at both an individual and community level, while convergence was primarily aimed toward purposeful, shared efforts at agenda-setting. While distinct, these two dimensions were strongly interrelated, as our case study showed. Namely, knowledge creation between participants was incentivized by an invitation to participate in an agendasetting forum (as detailed for instance in the ﬁrst vignette), which intensiﬁed at moments when choices were necessary, both in terms of determining the community’s strategic direction (as in the second vignette), and when an opportunity to give policy advice was available (as in the third vignette). At the same time, it became possible for the community to

contribute to agenda-setting, due to its recognition as a credible source of knowledge on development transportation. In this manner, the dimensions of gender and equitable transport were in fact added to the policy orientation of a large and inﬂuential multilateral institute. We identiﬁed that the online community accommodated development debate comprised of contested interests that ‘jostled for attention’ in a constantly ‘shifting space of engagement’ (as described by Gaventa, 2004: 37). In so doing, the online community sometimes provided a stepping stone toward policy interests, while it also offered a platform to address diverging knowledge needs. Indeed, by combining methods of interpretive and semantic network analysis, we were able to show that this happened simultaneously, around multiple, parallel core frames. Thus, the community was able to present itself as a uniﬁed whole, while at the same time accommodating divergence. It thereby afforded an intermediary space where both invited and self-mobilized interests could be represented, yielding an inclusive participatory space. Implications of our study By explaining how online communities afford intermediary spaces, we strengthen the bridge between on the one hand information systems research, which proved useful for highlighting speciﬁc enabling features of online communities, and on the other development studies, aimed at the inclusion of heterogeneous interest groups. We extend prior conceptualizations of ‘intermediary spaces’ by empirically explaining how online contexts are particularly well-equipped for such spaces to emerge. We also engage with prior studies in the realm of ICT4D, which have usefully addressed the importance of ‘intermediaries’ (Madon, 2000; Heeks, 2002; Molla and Heeks, 2007) between invited and self-mobilized spaces (Cornwall, 2004). However, to understand whether or indeed how intermediaries can broker between such spaces, it is important to better explain how the ﬂuctuation between invited and selfmobilized spaces can in fact occur, drawing on the unique features afforded by online communities, which was the purpose of this study. We thereby position our study within the ‘transformative’ discourse on information systems in developing countries (Avgerou, 2008), explaining how online communities as a form of ICT are ‘implicated in the dynamics of […] change’ (Avgerou, 2008: 136). In other words, technology is not neutral, but can activate social change. Moreover, this critical discourse recognizes that ‘technology receives meaning once it

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 371

is enacted by its users; people can control its use by interpreting and appropriating it to their speciﬁc realities (Orlikowski, 2002)’ (Avgerou, 2010a; Gigler, 2014: 22). Thus, our study is also more broadly positioned within the ‘contextual’ approach in information systems research (Orlikowski, 2002), which recognizes that transformative capacity derives from the interdependencies between technology and social context (Avgerou, 2001). We also contribute to the growing theoretical debate on ﬂuidity in professional settings (Schreyögg and Sydow, 2010; Faraj et al., 2011; Watson-Manheim et al., 2012), by looking in detail at temporary convergence as a feature of online communities, and empirically explaining how it is catalyzed by strategic framing of heterogeneous interests. Speciﬁcally, we show how the constant changes that online communities undergo are played out, and through temporary convergence afford the realization of intermediary spaces. Finally, we contribute to information systems research in a more general sense to illustrate how framing is a useful perspective to understand the contestability of interests that occurs in online communities. Some scholars of communities have made this point (Carlile, 2004; Roberts, 2006), but in the domain of public administration only Haas (1992) explicitly makes the connection between framing and policy agendasetting. However, no research has empirically studied how this framing actually takes place in online communities with heterogeneous interests. Drawing on an innovative methodological approach (which leading ICT4D scholars such as Avgerou (2010b) and Walsham (2012) have called for), this study represents a ﬁrst empirical analysis of ICT-enabled framing in online communities. This contribution is of importance in furthering understanding of whether, and how globally distributed practitioners inﬂuence policymaking toward realizing collective strategic action in an inclusive manner. Our research is particularly relevant for professionals in the domain of international development aid, but also yields important implications for practitioners in other knowledgeintensive, multi-stakeholder setting. We analyzed how strategic success derives from cooperation between highly diverse stakeholders, with a range of heterogeneous interests. We explained how these heterogeneous interests can be accommodated in a productive process of knowledge generation and agenda-setting, without the need for people with diverging perspectives to conform to dominant views. In fact, the intermediary space afforded by these interrelated practices paves the way toward enriching policy debates and local development practices alike, inclusive of heterogeneous interest groups. Further research can extend our study, for instance by exploring how distinct intermediary agents negotiate the process we explained here from a social network perspective (Marin and Wellman, 2010; Borgatti et al., 2014), or how it is affected by social identity processes (Ashforth and Mael, 1989). Finally, the study expands development-relevant settings (Walsham, 2012: 92) by highlighting the signiﬁcance of inclusive transportation as a critical, but often overlooked development enabler. Conclusion Given the dispersed setting of development cooperation comprising heterogeneous stakeholders, online communities

are particularly salient given their ﬂuidity and openendedness: namely, no-one is hierarchically identiﬁable to coordinate action, and outcomes are guided by participants. Our study shows how ICT-enabled communities can simultaneously accommodate heterogeneous interests, negotiated in an ongoing process of strategic framing, and thereby affording intermediary spaces for debate. In so doing, we further understanding of how ICT can support development processes by not only accommodating, but also beneﬁting from the heterogeneous perspectives that the sector brings together. Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge Marleen Huysman, Ed Sleebos, Wouter van Atteveldt, Tim Unwin, Shirin Madon and three anonymous reviewers, and of course, the research participants and ‘GRIT’ online community.

Notes
1 In September 2000, the United Nations General Assembly initiated a global partnership toward eight key areas for development, known as the ‘Millennium Development Goals’ or MDGs (see http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals). Transport remains implicit as a priority theme, but underlies all eight MDGs (see the World Bank report on ‘Transport and the Millennium Development Goals in Africa’, available at http://www4.worldbank.org/afr/ ssatp/Resources/PapersNotes/transport_mdg.pdf). 2 We used fulltext.exe, a text analysis tool to identify word frequencies and correlations (Leydesdorff, 1995; Leydesdorff and Welbers, 2011), removing stopwords based on standardized lists. This helped us compile complete (parsed) lists of the mostused words for each of the four vignettes, which we used as a basis for the semantic analyses. To more clearly demarcate the core frames emerging from clusters of words with high correlations, we conducted factor analyses with Oblimin rotation, deleting items with factor loadings of less than 0.60, or with high crossloadings on other factors (Hinkin, 1998). Our reliability analyses of each of the factors yielded Cronbach’s alphas between 0.72 and 0.97 (included in Appendix B), thereby meeting the standard research requirements (Hinkin, 1998). We visually conveyed the results by combining Pajek (Batagelj and Mrvar, 2004) and VOSviewer (Van Eck and Waltman, 2009), open source programs used for analysis and visualization of social and semantic networks. 3 PRSPs or Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers comprise strategic development plans, composed by member countries of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. For more on PRSPs, see http://www.imf.org/external/np/prsp/prsp.aspx

References
Amin, A. and Cohendet, P. (2004). Architectures of Knowledge. Firms, Capabilities and Communities, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Ashforth, B.E. and Mael, F. (1989). Social Identity Theory and the Organization, Academy of Management Review 14(1): 20–39. Avgerou, C. (2001). The Signiﬁcance of Context in Information Systems and Organizational Change, Information Systems Journal 11(1): 43–63. Avgerou, C. (2008). Discourses on Innovation and Development in Information Systems in Developing Countries’ Research, Journal of Information Technology 23(3): 133–146. Avgerou, C. (2010a). Discourses on ICT and Development, Information Technologies and International Development 6(3): 1–18.

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

372 4

Avgerou, C. (2010b). Comments on Allen Lee’s Article ‘Retrospect and Prospect’: Information systems research in the last and next 25 years’ from a sociotheoretical IS research perspective, Journal of Information Technology 25(4): 355–357. Banjo, G., Gordon, H. and Riverson, J. (2012). ‘Rural Transport: Improving its contribution to growth and poverty reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa,’ Africa Transport Policy Paper, Working paper No. 93. Available at: [WWW document] http://www.ssatp.org/en/publication/rural-transport-improving-itscontribution-growth-and-poverty-reduction-sub-saharan. Batagelj, V. and Mrvar, A. (2004). Pajek – Analysis and visualization of large networks, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin. Benford, R.D. and Snow, D.A. (2000). Framing Processes and Social Movements: An overview and assessment, Annual Review of Sociology 26(1): 611–639. Blanchard, A.L. and Markus, M.L. (2004). The Experienced Sense of a Virtual Community: Characteristics and processes, ACM Sigmis Database 35(1): 64–79. Borgatti, S.P., Brass, D.J. and Halgin, D.S. (2014). Social Network Research: Confusions, criticisms, and controversies, Research in the Sociology of Organizations 40: 1–29. Braa, J., Monteiro, E. and Sahay, S. (2004). Networks of Action: Sustainable health information systems across developing countries, MIS Quarterly 28(3): 337–362. Buchanan, D. and Dawson, P. (2007). Discourse and Audience: Organizational change as multi-story process, Journal of Management Studies 44(5): 669–686. Buckwalter, N.D. (2014). The Potential for Public Empowerment through Government‐organized Participation, Public Administration Review 74(5): 573–584. Buliung, R.N., Shimi, A.C. and Mitra, R. (2014). Automobility and Nonmotorized Transport in the Global South, in A. Walks (ed.) Driving Cities, Driving Inequality, Driving Politics: The urban political economy and ecology of automobility, New York: Routledge, pp. 152–168. Carlile, P.R. (2004). Transferring, Translating, and Transforming: An integrative framework for managing knowledge across boundaries, Organization Science 15(5): 555–568. Castells, M. (1996). The Information Age: Economy, society and culture: Vol. 1 (2nd edn,). The rise of the network society, Oxford: Blackwell. Chigona, W., Beukes, D., Vally, J. and Tanner, M. (2009). Can Mobile Internet Help Alleviate Social Exclusion in Developing Countries? The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries 36(7): 1–16. Contu, A. and Girei, E. (2014). NGOs Management and the Value of ‘Partnerships’ for Equality in International Development: What’s in a name? Human Relations 67(2): 205–232. Cooke, B. and Kothari, U. (eds.) (2001). Participation: The new tyranny? London: Zed Books. Cornelissen, J.P. and Werner, M.D. (2014). Putting Framing in Perspective: A review of framing and frame analysis across the management and organizational literature, The Academy of Management Annals 8(1): 181–235. Cornwall, A. (2004). Spaces for Transformation? Reﬂections on Issues of Power and Difference in Participation in Development, in S. Hickey and G. Mohan (eds.) Participation: From tyranny to transformation? Exploring new approaches to participation in development, London: Zed Books, pp. 75–91. Cornwall, A. (2008). Unpacking ‘Participation’: Models, meanings and practices, Community Development Journal 43(3): 269–283. Cornwall, A. and Coelho, V.S. (eds.) (2007). Spaces for Change? The Politics of Citizen Participation in New Democratic Arenas, London: Zed Books. Czarniawska, B. (2007). Shadowing, and Other Techniques for Doing Fieldwork in Modern Society, Malmö: Liber AB. Edmondson, A.C. and McManus, S.E. (2007). Methodological Fit in Management Field Research, Academy of Management Review 32(4): 1155–1179. Eisenhardt, K.M. and Graebner, M.E. (2007). Theory Building from Cases: Opportunities and challenges, Academy of Management Journal 50(1): 25–32. Escobar, A. (2011). Encountering Development: The making and unmaking of the third world. [New in Paper] Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Eversole, R. (2010). Remaking Participation: Challenges for community development practice, Community Development Journal 47(1): 29–41. Faraj, S., Jarvenpaa, S.L. and Majchrzak, A. (2011). Knowledge Collaboration in Online Communities, Organization Science 22(5): 1224–1239. Ferguson, J.E. (forthcoming). Inclusive Perspectives or In-depth Learning? A longitudinal case study of past debates and future directions in knowledge management for development, Journal of Knowledge Management, in press.

Ferguson, J.E., Huysman, M.H. and Soekijad, M. (2010). Knowledge Management in Practice: Pitfalls and potentials for development, World Development 38(12): 1797–1810. Ferguson, J.E., Soekijad, M., Huysman, M.H. and Vaast, E. (2013). Blogging for ICT4D: Reﬂecting and engaging with peers to build development discourse, Information Systems Journal 23(4): 307–328. Fiss, P.C. and Hirsch, P.M. (2005). The Discourse of Globalization: Framing and sensemaking of an emergent concept, American Sociological Review 70(1): 29–52. Flyvbjerg, B. (2006). Five Misunderstandings about Case-study Research, Qualitative Inquiry 12(2): 219–245. Gaventa, J. (2004). Towards Participatory Governance: Assessing the transformative possibilities, in S. Hickey and G. Mohan (eds.) Participation: From tyranny to transformation, London: Zed Books, pp. 25–41. Gigler, B.S. (2014). Informational Capabilities: The missing link for understanding the impact of ICT on development, in B. Gigler (ed.) Closing the Feedback Loop, Can Technology Bridge the Accountability Gap? Washington DC: World Bank, pp. 17–42. Gioia, D.A., Corley, K.G. and Hamilton, A.L. (2013). Seeking Qualitative Rigor in Inductive Research: Notes on the Gioia methodology, Organizational Research Methods 16(1): 15–31. Goffman, E. (1974). Frame Analysis: An essay on the organization of experience, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Gough, C. and Shackley, S. (2001). The Respectable Politics of Climate Change: The epistemic communities and NGOs, International Affairs 77(2): 329–345. Haas, E.B. (1990). When Knowledge Is Power, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Haas, P. (2004). When Does Power Listen to Truth? A Constructivist Approach to the Policy Process, Journal of European Public Policy 11(4): 569–592. Haas, P.M. (1992). Introduction: Epistemic communities and international policy coordination, International Organization 46(1): 1–35. Hayes, N. and Walsham, G. (2001). Participation in Groupware-mediated Communities of Practice: A socio-political analysis of knowledge working, Information and Organization 11(4): 263–288. Hayes, N. and Westrup, C. (2012). Context and the Processes of ICT for Development, Information and Organization 22(1): 23–36. Heeks, R. (2002). Information Systems and Developing Countries: Failure, success, and local improvisations, The Information Society 18(2): 101–112. Heeks, R. (2008). ICT4D 2.0: The next phase of applying ICT for international development, Computer 41(6): 26–33. Heeks, R. (2010). Development 2.0: The IT-enabled transformation of international development, Communications of the ACM 53(4): 22–24. Hickey, S. and Mohan, G. (2004). Participation: From tyranny to transformation, London: Zed Books. Hine, C.E. (2005). Virtual Methods. Issues in Social Research on the Internet, Oxford/New York: Berg. Hinkin, T.R. (1998). A Brief Tutorial on the Development of Measures for Use in Survey Questionnaires, Organizational Research Methods 1(1): 104–121. Howe, J. and Richards, P. (1984). Rural Roads and Poverty Alleviation, London: Intermediate Technology Publications. International Monetary Fund (last updated 19th May 2015). Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSP) Available at: [WWW document] http://www.imf.org/ external/np/prsp/prsp.aspx. Kane, G.C., Alavi, M., Labianca, J. and Borgatti, S. (2014). Integrating Social Networks and Information Systems: A review and framework for research, MIS Quarterly 38(1): 275–304. Kane, G.C., Majchrzak, A., Johnson, J. and Chenisern, L. (2009). A Longitudinal Model of Perspective Making and Perspective Taking Within Fluid Online Collectives, in Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS), Paper 10: 1–17; Phoenix, Arizona. Langley, A., Smallman, C., Tsoukas, H. and Van de Ven, A.H. (2013). Process Studies of Change in Organization and Management: Unveiling temporality, activity, and ﬂow, Academy of Management Journal 56(1): 1–13. Leclercq-Vandelannoitte, A. (2011). Organizations as Discursive Constructions: A Foucauldian approach, Organization Studies 32(9): 1247–1271. Leydesdorff, L. (1995). The Challenge of Scientometrics: The development, measurement, and self-organization of scientiﬁc communications, Leiden: DSWO Press, Leiden University. Leydesdorff, L. and Welbers, K. (2011). The Semantic Mapping of Words and Cowords in Contexts, Journal of Informetrics 5(3): 469–475.

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 373

Madon, S. (2000). The Internet and Socio-economic Development: Exploring the interaction, Information Technology and People 13(2): 85–101. Madon, S., Reinhard, N., Roode, D. and Walsham, G. (2009). Digital Inclusion Projects in Developing Countries: Processes of institutionalization, Information Technology for Development 15(2): 95–107. Maitlis, S. and Lawrence, T.B. (2007). Triggers and Enablers of Sensegiving in Organizations, Academy of Management Journal 50(1): 57–84. Marin, A. and Wellman, B. (2010). Social Network Analysis: An introduction, in J. Scott and P. Carrington (eds.) Handbook of Social Network Analysis, London: SAGE, pp. 1–8. McFarlane, C. (2006). Knowledge, Learning and Development: A post-rationalist approach, Progress in Development Studies 6(4): 287–305. Merriam-Webster dictionary Available at [WWW document] http://www. merriam-webster.com/dictionary. Mitiku, T.N. (2009). A Framework for a Pro-Growth, Pro-Poor Transport Strategy: Guidance Note, Washington DC: World Bank. Molla, A. and Heeks, R. (2007). Exploring e-Commerce Beneﬁts for Businesses in a Developing Country, The Information Society 23(2): 95–108. Mosse, E.L. and Sahay, S. (2003). Counter Networks, Communication and Health Information Systems, in M. Korpela, R. Montealegre and A. Poulymenakou (eds.) Organizational Information Ststems in the Context of Globalization, New York: Springer, pp. 35–51. Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) (2015). Progress Report (2013–2014) of the MDB Working Group on Sustainable Transport. African Development Bank (AfDB), Asian Development Bank (ADB), Development Bank of Latin America (CAF), European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), European Investment Bank (EIB), Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), World Bank (WB). Available at: [WWW document] http://www.adb.org/documents/progress-report-2013-2014-mdb-workinggroup-sustainable-transport. Njoh, A.J. (2008). Implications of Africa’s Transportation Systems for Development in the Era of Globalization, The Review of Black Political Economy 35(4): 147–162. O’Mahony, S. and Bechky, B.A. (2008). Boundary Organizations: Enabling collaboration among unexpected allies, Administrative Science Quarterly 53(3): 422–459. Orlikowski, W.J. (2002). Knowing in Practice: Enacting a collective capability in distributed organizing, Organization Science 13(3): 249–273. Powell, M. (2006). Which Knowledge? Whose Reality? An Overview of Knowledge Used in the Development Sector, Development in Practice 16(6): 518–532. Puri, S.K. (2007). Integrating Scientiﬁc with Indigenous Knowledge: Constructing knowledge alliances for land management in India, MIS Quarterly 31(2): 355–379. Roberts, J. (2006). Limits to Communities of Practice, Journal of Management Studies 43(3): 623–639. Rossi, B. (2004). Revisiting Foucauldian Approaches: Power dynamics in development projects, Journal of Development Studies 40(6): 1–29. Schreyögg, G. and Sydow, J. (2010). Crossroads. Organizing for Fluidity? Dilemmas of New Organizational Forms, Organization Science 21(6): 1251–1262. Sen, A. (1999). Development as Freedom, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Smelser, N.J. and Marx, G.T. (2011). Theory of Collective Behavior, New Orleans, LA: Quid Pro, LLC. Taylor, M. (2007). Community Participation in the Real World: Opportunities and pitfalls in new governance spaces, Urban studies 44(2): 297–317. Tolley, R.S. and Turton, B.J. (1995). Transport Systems, Policy and Planning: A geographical approach, Harlow: Longman group. Unwin, T. (2009). ICT4D, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Van Eck, N. and Waltman, L. (2009). Software Survey: VOSviewer, A Computer Program for Bibliometric Mapping, Scientometrics 84(2): 523–538.

Vasconcellos, E.A. (2013). Urban Transport Environment and Equity: The case for developing countries, New York: Earthscan. Venkatesh, V., Brown, S.A. and Bala, H. (2013). Bridging the Qualitativequantitative Divide: Guidelines for conducting mixed methods research in information systems, MIS Quarterly 37(1): 21–54. Venkatesh, V. and Sykes, T.A. (2013). Digital Divide Initiative Success in Developing Countries: A longitudinal ﬁeld study in a village in India, Information Systems Research 24(2): 239–260. Wagner, C., Cheung, K., Lee, F. and Ip, R. (2003). Enhancing e-Government in Developing Countries: Managing knowledge through virtual communities, The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries 14(4): 1–20. Walsham, G. (2006). Doing Interpretive Research, European Journal of Information Systems 15(3): 320–330. Walsham, G. (2012). Are We Making a Better World with ICTs? Reﬂections on a Future Agenda for the IS Field, Journal of Information Technology 27(2): 87–93. Walsham, G., Robey, D. and Sahay, S. (2007). Foreword: Special issue on information systems in developing countries, MIS Quarterly 31(2): 317–326. Wareham, J., Fox, P.B. and Cano Giner, J.L. (2014). Technology Ecosystem Governance, Organization Science 25(4): 1195–1215. Wasko, M.M. and Faraj, S. (2005). Why Should I Share? Examining Social Capital and Knowledge Contribution in Electronic Networks of Practice, MIS Quarterly 29(1): 35–57. Waters, R.D., Burnett, E., Lamm, A. and Lucas, J. (2009). Engaging Stakeholders through Social Networking: How nonproﬁt organizations are using Facebook, Public Relations Review 35(2): 102–106. Watkins, S.C., Swidler, A. and Hannan, T. (2012). Outsourcing Social Transformation: Development NGOs as organizations, Sociology 38: 285–315. Watson-Manheim, M.B., Chudoba, K.M. and Crowston, K. (2012). Perceived Discontinuities and Constructed Continuities in Virtual Work, Information Systems Journal 22(1): 29–52. Williams, G. (2004). Towards a Repoliticization of Participatory Development: Political capabilities and spaces of empowerment, in S. Hickey and G. Mohan (eds.) Participation: From tyranny to transformation, London: Zed Books, pp. 92–109. Zheng, Y. (2009). Different Spaces for e‐Development: What can we learn from the capability approach? Information Technology for Development 15(2): 66–82.

About the authors Julie Ferguson is an assistant professor of Organization Sciences. She studies virtual collaboration and knowledge sharing in heterogeneous, self-organizing communities, often set in development and humanitarian aid (also the focus of a recently awarded Dutch Science Foundation grant). She has published in among others World Development, Information Systems Journal, Journal of Knowledge Management, and Knowledge Management for Development Journal. Maura Soekijad is an associate professor of Knowledge, Information and Networks at VU University Amsterdam. Her research interests include knowledge sharing, creation, and innovation in (inter-organizational) networks. She has published in among others Journal of Information Technology, Journal of Management Studies, Organization Studies, and Information Systems Journal.

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

374 4

Appendix A

Table A1 Interpretive codes, descriptions, and example quotations

Code Knowledge sharing Seeking expertise

Description Quotes whereby the person shares speciﬁc experiences, or asks for speciﬁc input related to a topic he/she is working on.

Example

Sharing knowledge

Joining forces

‘I wonder if there is anybody, who is currently involved in any of these review processes, that could inform the discussion list whether gender is being considered in their process, how is it being considered (if it is) and what changes may there be in transport policy as a result of its inclusion? Is there anything the discussion list could help with in terms of suggestions on how gender could be incorporated into such review processes?’ Quotes involving the exchange of perspectives ‘Through these discussions we can also see the toward building/extending shared understanding potential for collaboration within the GRIT of a phenomenon. community on a number of issues, in particular Transport & Health on which there seem to be a number of parallel initiatives. By networking these initiatives we can strengthen their impact and ensure that we build upon rather than replicate learning.’ Quotes expressing the need for and an invitation to ‘Dear all, I think GRIT should take up this share expertise and join efforts as a community opportunity and challenge. I think amongst all of (toward policy inﬂuencing). the members of GRIT we have enough resource to do this – without overloading or relying on one point or organisation. […] I think GRIT should have a say, so let’s make it happen.’ ‘Who are we? By the way, I think it would be wonderful if we knew each other better. Not least since most of us, if I smell this right, are not about to disappear from the scene and give up on the gender agenda which unites us here. (And, by the way again, you cannot believe how useful it is to have a picture of the colleague with whom you are discussing something – and in particular when you may not be on the same wave length and start to have your doubts – to see and know a bit more about this person who after all is your friend.’ ‘We gender and transport specialists can be of great assistance to [MDA] policy makers and indeed to local communities in charting the environment and contributing to feasibility and innovatory studies which can help women achieve a modern travel environment.’ ‘It appears […] some countries are reviewing […] their national transport policies and exploring the connections and linkages between them. I was wondering to what extent gender issues is being incorporated into these reviews. […] It appears to me that there is a golden opportunity here for us to try encourage the integration of gender into any ongoing consideration of the links between PRSP’s and Transport Policy.’

Deﬁning the community Strategic positioning Quotes seeking to establish the identity of the (identity processes) community, toward determining its future direction.

Community boundaries

Quotes seeking to delimit what the community should (and should not) address.

Strategic opportunities Initiatives for agenda-setting/policy interests

Quotes whereby the purpose of the message is to inﬂuence a policy agenda or debate.

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 375

Table A1 Continued

Code Access to funding

Description Quotes reﬂecting efforts/opportunities to access funds in support of a community activity or project.

Example ‘We have sought funding from the […] Department for International Development who chose to not fund it. We are actively pursuing other avenues. I would welcome any other thoughts on this idea. Perhaps there may be development agencies lurking on the list who might be interested in funding much needed work in this area?’ ‘I think there’s a lesson to be learned here – the time has to be right for a good idea to be taken up … am glad that ﬁve years down the line the [MDA]’s ﬁnally ready to take this gender atlas idea on board! Maybe we could attribute some of this change to GRIT’s involvement in [MDA]’s transport strategy :-)!’

Leveraging expertise Quotes reﬂecting efforts to share community expertise toward policy processes.

Institutionalizing policy interests Policy Quotes that show an indication that policy is being ‘UNIFEM in Afghanistan is assisting to create implementation put into practice (e.g. projects). women friendly transport facility/services. Apparently an MoU has been signed between […] and the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and Ministry of Transport. There are four major components that the main focus of the initiative is placed upon: […] This is rather a small scale initiative piloted in Kabul, which will eventually be replicated in all cities/towns with motor transport.’ Mainstreaming Quotes that reﬂect efforts aimed at broadening ‘In order to translate gender sensitivity into action among stakeholders acceptance of a particular agenda point among plan, Guidelines for mainstreaming gender in the people or groups they are trying to inﬂuence. subsector have been developed. […] is planning to implement the Gender policy Statement along with others policy statements on others cross-cutting issues, namely Environment, HIV/AIDS, Occupational Health and Safety and issues of the People with Disabilities and the elderly. These crossing cutting issues are considered to be closely interlinked, and all crucial to enhance the road sub-sector contribution to poverty reduction.’ Involvement with Quotes that show active interaction with policy or ‘Many thanks for this. I think this is a great policy/funding agency funding agencies (multilateral / bilateral). opportunity to get transport issues into a ‘gender’ agenda where they are so often missing.’ Initiating policy engagement Sharing policyQuotes whereby the sender is sharing some kind of ‘I am working for rural access programme in Nepal related knowledge policy-related information, and/or he/she is part of – a DFID project. If you want to know how we have integrated gender in our programme, I’ll let a policy agency or project. you know.’ Sharing policy Quotes presenting an opportunity to engage with ‘Dear All, Please be aware that […] is in the process opportunities policy formulation initiatives. of developing a Transport Policy. One facet of this is rural accessibility. An […] background paper on this issue should be available by the end of the year.’ Unifying diverging interests toward agenda-setting (Efforts aimed at) Quotes that show efforts at inﬂuencing policy or inﬂuencing policy lobby. ‘Many thanks for this very impressive response to the draft Transport Strategy review. I understand that a group of the participants is currently summarizing the main points for the Strategy. Having been away for the past few weeks I have not yet caught up with all the exchanges but

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

376 4

Table A1 Continued

Code

Description

Example

the few that I have seen show that this exercise will make a valuable contribution.’ Reacting against Quotes whereby the person writing the message is ‘My contribution is that […] has to DO THEIR policy institutions opposing a policy agency/organization or policy HOMEWORK ﬁrst – which is ﬁnd what is going purpose. on – actors and stakeholders – and take them into consideration – BEFORE deciding any speciﬁc/ target local project – and EMPOWER the actors that have been there – DO NOT COME WITH MORE MANUALS. we DO NOT NEED THEM at all! We need […] their strategic view OF OUR WORK, of what we can improve and they should help us to improve. we do not need a NEW PROJECT to hire some of us (generally our smarter and more active members).’ Discussing how to Quotes directed at strengthening policy & donor ‘I’m more of an activist so my focus is on what mainstream/implement involvement, and getting policies implemented. works and how to do it …. Therefore one question policy Emphasis is on *how to*, so actual practices. I feel has not been answered in the discussion so far is What kind of transport services would beneﬁt men, women with children in areas described in the messages of […]? How would these services contribute to the MDGs and the lives of men, women, children, persons with disabilities, persons living with HIV/AIDS (PLWA) etc.? What can the transport sector do to better the lives of women and other disadvantaged persons ?’ Involving policy Quotes reﬂecting efforts to involve people from ‘I may be able to identify someone there but even if networks one’s network at a policy level (e.g. multilateral/ I do not, I know with your networking you have a bilateral agencies) to participate in GRIT activities. number of people you could interest to participate.’ Building community knowledge Sharing thematic Quotes aimed at sharing information and/or information/resources resources to build the community knowledge base. Sharing local Quotes whereby examples are shared related to the examples local projects of the sender. ‘We would also like to encourage everyone to share resources, which we will share on the website.’ ‘I see that when a large road cut through the village in rural area in the places where I do my research, life becomes difﬁcult because of all the dusts, noise and other pollution that is caused (esp. for those who stay long time at home). Also, it makes it difﬁcult for local people (esp. women) who use traditional transport such as bicycles (because of dusts as well as trafﬁc safety). The so-called “development” passes through them and they simply become “corridors”.’

Pursuing shared interests Mobilizing the Quotes whereby the sender seeks to activate the community community to participate in a discussion and share/generate knowledge. Seeking funding

‘Many thanks for this. I think this is a great opportunity to get transport issues into a “gender” agenda where they are so often missing. Any suggestions to making a collective effort?’ Quotes reﬂecting efforts to access funds in support ‘The idea is to see if we can from the beginning of a community activity or project. build the base for a strong disruption and communications component. Clearly here at the outset this entire exercise is depending on the entire [GRIT] group […] But if we can already start to get other public institutions and agencies involved and is some way behind this SelfOrganizing Collaborative Network, well that can only be to the good. What might they do to justify their bit? […] we would very much like to see if we

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 377

Table A1 Continued

Code

Description

Example

Joint projects/ initiatives

could get support for paying a possibly small but still deeply symbolic honorarium […] The trick will be to make sure that our partners do something for their supper (no free rides).’ Quotes reﬂecting initiatives for concrete joint Grit, I think, could also become a vehicle in activities or projects by GRIT as a community, e.g. promoting awareness and encouraging solutions to workshops, special issues, etc. this very gender speciﬁc problem.

Networking/fostering participation Forging connections Quotes whereby the sender seeks to establish some ‘Through these discussions we can also see the kind of network connection between people (can potential for collaboration within the GRIT also include him-/herself). community on a number of issues, in particular Transport & Health on which there seem to be a number of parallel initiatives. By networking these initiatives we can strengthen their impact and ensure that we build upon rather than replicate learning.’ Attracting new Quotes aimed at extending community ‘If we can ﬁnd a way to tempt in people with audiences participation. backgrounds that extend beyond the usual limits of the traditionally dominant ﬁelds […], I think we would be able to make real progress.’ Fostering Quotes aimed at activating the community. ‘The further we get into this the more I am involvement convinced that many of us are going to wish to continue to stay in contact and in various ways extend our dialogue and eventual collaboration. As far as I am concerned this is one of the major goals of our ICT musings, ways of bringing us together to accomplish some things that we just might otherwise never have been able to do alone.’ Engaging diverging interests Seeking Quotes seeking out different perspectives to heterogeneous strengthen the content of a discussion. participation ‘I believe that if we are interested in developing a gender and transport professional ﬁeld we need to start taking account of the local and regional dimensions of this relationship. If we wish to be operational in our professional practice and not simply observers of this relationship we have to engage with local custom and practice around women and transport.’ ‘I am afraid we are getting into quite a few battles here when it is the war we want to win. I have the idea that we might start to disperse our efforts and lose the focus that is vitally needed […].’ ‘I am writing from […] Gender and Development information service at the Institute of […]. We are currently doing a piece of work on gender and infrastructure and are looking for up-to-date tools/ guidelines on gender and transport. In particular I am looking for materials that deal with a: decentralisation and private sector participation, b: service delivery to the poor, and c: governance. I was wondering if you might be able to recommend some such resources – I would be most grateful for any suggestions.’ ‘Dear […], Thanks for this very informative piece. You would make a good reporter. Reading it was like I was in attendance. It is so touching, so

Debating diverging perspectives

Quotes about different perspectives on an issue (process or content).

Developing local expertise Seeking information/ Quotes seeking information to help participants’ resources in support of local projects. local projects

Personal communications among participants

Quotes showing messages exchanged between individual participants (via the forum).

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

378 4

Table A1 Continued

Code

Description

Example common and yet preventable. By the way are you coming to the Uganda workshop?’

Expressing local interests/supporting local activities Local efforts to Quotes reﬂecting efforts to agendize a particular ‘I have been asked to provide some advice on this inﬂuence policy theme or topic, related to a local project outside the area to a former colleague who is currently advising community. […] Bangladesh on these issues. Any advice welcome.’ Activities related to Quotes whereby the sender focuses mostly on what ‘I am doing a survey about gender and transport local projects he/she is doing at a local level (i.e. outside of the policy, with a goal of comparing the World Bank community). and DFID projects in West Africa. I would like to interview consultants and employees by phone and hope that some of you may be willing to participate. […] Anyone who would be willing to chat with me for 20–25 min can respond to me personally at […]’ Sharing/generating expertise How to realize Quotes related to different perspectives on how objectives something should be realized. ‘This is I think a good chance to remind some that gender and transport is not all about women and transport, and that both sides must give this issue serious consideration.’

Policy pursuits Identifying strategic opportunities

Agenda-setting

Quotes related to opportunities for the community ‘We gender and transport specialists can be of great to engage in policy debate. assistance to [MDA] policy makers and indeed to local communities in charting the environment and contributing to feasibility and innovatory studies which can help women achieve a modern travel environment.’ Quotes related to which topics should be included ‘Aren’t ICTs about the improvement of lives of in policy agendas. people? Who then says the topic is taboo on this forum. Get serious. I think ICT practitioners should seriously consider new ways to improve this fast growing but miserable population.’

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 379

Appendix B Statistical analysis semantic networks
Table B1 Factor analysis vignette 1

Table B2 Factor analysis vignette 2

Label 1 GOAL CHILDREN MDG SCHOOL VILLAGE IMPACT INFRASTRUCTURE ROLE ICT THEME TECHNOLOGIES INTERNET MOBILE COMMUNICATION TOOLS INFORMATION FREE WORLD CSO CIVIL PRSP PARTICIPATION TRADE TIME POVERTY COUNTRY MARKET POOR CONFERENCE GAP POLICY PRACTICE MAINSTREAMING STUDIES 0.847 0.822 0.810 0.803 0.730 0.706 0.658 0.645

Core frames (word clusters) 2 3 4 5

Label 1 PRSP CIVIL CSO SOCIETY TRANSPORT BANK PARTICIPATION MDA SCHOOL MDG EDUCATION IMPACT HOUSEHOLD COMMUNITY MARKET POVERTY TIME WATER DISTANCE POOR LABOUR WOMEN ICT TECHNOLOGIES MOBILE COMMUNICATION INTERNET TOOLS SUPPORT TECHNOLOGY CHALLENGE MATERIAL NETWORK POLICIES MAINSTREAMING DONOR GOVERNMENT FEMALE EQUALITY GENDER HIV

Core frames (word clusters) 2 3 4

0.851 0.841 0.839 0.812 0.802 0.767 0.766 0.752 0.738 0.727 0.644 0.636 0.891 0.839 0.837 0.837 0.828 0.826 0.717 0.700 0.654 0.620

−0.875 −0.867 −0.862 −0.861 −0.834 −0.811 −0.767 −0.752 −0.699 −0.681 0.834 0.832 0.827 0.797 0.796

−0.892 −0.888 −0.877 −0.849 −0.847 −0.804 −0.689 −0.663 −0.651 −0.617 −0.610

−0.810 −0.809 −0.778 −0.714 −0.674 −0.638 0.830 0.807 0.784 0.738 0.631

Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. Rotation Method: Oblimin with Kaiser Normalization. Rotation converged in nine iterations.

−0.866 −0.857 −0.824 −0.819 −0.818 −0.766 −0.705 −0.665

Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. Rotation Method: Oblimin with Kaiser Normalization. Rotation converged in nine iterations.

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

380 4
Table B3 Factor analysis vignette 3 Table B4 Factor analysis vignette 4

Label 1 IDEA DISCUSSION ROLE HELP OPPORTUNITY WEEK CONSULTATION AGENDA SUGGESTION KEY PROCESS PEOPLE JOINT CONCERNS MDA INITIATIVE SUMMARY STEP STRATEGIES REVIEW DEVELOPMENT QUESTION RURAL SECTION PAPER GENDER MATERIAL WORLD PARITY EQUITY INDIA FINAL MOBILITY TOILET PUBLIC PROJECT SECTOR 0.892 0.878 0.877 0.871 0.870 0.850 0.836 0.827 0.826 0.736 0.730 0.719 0.719 0.685 0.668 0.665 0.659 0.649 0.646 0.627 0.597

Core frames (word clusters) 2 3 4

Label 1 SHARETRANSPORT SHARE CLIMATE LANGUAGE HEALTH SITE PARTNERSHIP EUROPE COUNTRIES CITIES ARTICLE FORUM HAITI BIKE VEHICLE HELP FIELD DAY ROLE ROAD POOR RURAL ACCESS COPENHAGEN OWN LOCAL CHILDREN GENDER LIST MDA ISSUES LINK COMMUNITY ZIMBABWE TRANSPORTATION IDEA READER PROJECT

Core frames (word clusters) 2 3 4 5

0.900 0.894 0.786 0.746 0.745 0.700 0.683 0.671 0.648 0.612 0.606 0.605 0.855 0.855 0.839 0.810 0.722 0.629 0.898 0.788 0.783 0.744 0.727 0.700 0.676 0.661 0.880 0.858 0.820 0.806 0.802 0.690

0.791 0.785 0.690 0.652 0.647 0.647 0.612 0.882 0.660 0.653 0.608

−0.745 −0.671 −0.646 −0.613 −0.608

Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. Rotation Method: Oblimin with Kaiser Normalization. Rotation converged in eleven iterations.

−0.869 −0.845 −0.815 −0.729 −0.681 −0.660

Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. Rotation Method: Oblimin with Kaiser Normalization. Rotation converged in nine iterations.

Multiple interests or unified voice?

JE Ferguson and M Soekijad

3 381
Table B5 Reliability statistics factor analyses of core frames

Vignette 1

Core frame (word cluster) Core frame 1 Core frame 2 Core frame 3 Core frame 4 Core frame 1 Core frame 2 Core frame 3 Core frame 4 Core frame 5 Core frame 1 Core frame 2 Core frame 3 Core frame 4 Core frame 1 Core frame 2 Core frame 3 Core frame 4 Core frame 5

Cronbach’s alpha 0.940 0.935 0.934 0.921 0.928 0.945 0.886 0.905 0.894 0.970 0.865 0.721 0.833 0.942 0.890 0.909 0.914 0.882

Number of items 12 10 11 8 8 10 5 6 5 21 7 4 5 12 6 8 6 6

2

3

4

