Journal of Information Technology (2016) 31, 265–266
ª 2016 Association for Information Technology Trust All rights reserved 0268-3962/16 www.palgrave.com/journals

Commentary

Commentary on Davison and Martinsons’ ‘Context is King! Considering particularism in research design and reporting’
´ ndez Walter D. Ferna
School of Information Systems and Technology Management, Business School, UNSW Australia, Kensington, Australia Correspondence: ´ ndez, School of Information Systems and Technology Management, Business School, UNSW Australia, Walter D. Ferna Kensington, Australia E-mail: w.fernandez@unsw.edu.au

Journal of Information Technology (2016) 31, 265–266. doi:10.1057/s41265-016-0004-8; published online 21 September 2016

avison and Martinsons’ article calls for studies that are not only context-aware but also context-explicit and thus giving their contextual characteristics a central role in creating, developing and disseminating knowledge. The authors argue for a particularistic research design that would allow researchers to set and describe boundary conditions, generalise only within context and, ultimately, be useful to both information systems practice and researchers wanting to extend or test theories. I found the discussion on the role of context in research deliciously provocative and well-argued. Context is a vital element of behavioural research, and perhaps also for economic, technical and design science research. In the case of developing countries, for example, context plays a critical but often neglected role in the implementation of informa´ ntion and communication technologies (da Silva and Ferna dez, 2016). Yet, the importance of context is not just restricted to developing countries; neither is context a mere descriptive consideration. Context has agency power; as it is a key element of structuring structures, the habitus inﬂuencing humans and their practices (Bourdieu, 1977, 1990). Thus, I adhere to the authors’ timely call for an explicit and thoughtful consideration of the context during research design, execution and articulation. Furthermore, the article’s appeal to indigenous constructs is refreshing and, I hope, inspiring. It has always puzzled me to observe how some IS researchers could, for example, use students as proxies for project managers and thus adopting a universalist approach that is disconnected from context and real actors. Having managed complex IT projects for many years, I believe that such attempts are likely to result in irrelevant simpliﬁcations, detached from the complications of real lives and real careers.

D

My strong alignment with the authors’ view is perhaps counterproductive when one has been called to criticise the article, develop its argument and propose corrections or modiﬁcations. However, I believe the article could have beneﬁted by showing exemplars that do consider context and cultural diversity and also present good theoretical value and generalisation power. While these studies are rare in topranked IS journals, they exist—thus proving that it is indeed possible to publish research that provides good value in terms of context, rigour and relevance. To illustrate my previous comment, I am suggesting an example that goes a long way towards meeting Davison and Martinsons’ call for context-explicit and context-aware studies and the use of indigenous constructs: Ning Su’s article in MISQ (Su, 2015), which provides one the best examples in the IS literature on the use of context as a key element designing, executing and articulating the results of a study. Su (2015) explores an international outsourcing context, from the supplier viewpoint, focusing on employees’ sensemaking practices when dealing with their Chinese, Japanese and American customers. This paper describes the context of SoftCo (a pseudonym) and the context of the participants and their cultural framing processes. In doing so, Su (2015) presents clear boundary conditions. From the beginning of the article, we are informed that the multi-year, in-depth, case study was conducted at one of the largest China-based IT service suppliers in order to uncover the process of intercultural interactions from the perspective of supplier, and adopting a view of culture that is integrated with the evolutionary theory of sensemaking. As Davison and Martinsons suggested, the clear boundary conditions in Su’s (2015) are likely to facilitate further studies and theoretical development.

Commentary on Davison and Martinsons’ 266

´ ndez W. D. Ferna

The excellent treatment of context in Su (2015) allows readers to understand the psychological process of internal change through intercultural interactions, in this case as enacted by SoftCo employees. By staying focused on the context, Su (2015) develops a grounded theoretical account of the process of cultural framing (Giddens, 1984; Goffman, 1974; Snow et al, 1986; Swidler, 1986), demonstrates the relevance of the dynamic constructivist approach (Hong and Chiu, 2001), and shows that ‘‘culture is temporal, emergent, domain-speciﬁc, and is constantly produced and reproduced, interpreted and reinterpreted in social interactions’’ (Su, 2015, p. 961). While reading Su (2015), one is at all times immersed in the context in which the practice occurs; this property of the paper facilitates our understanding of the actions and of the evolution of the process described. It is precisely because of our understanding of the context that the article makes sense and becomes useful to us. Yet, sensemaking was facilitated by the author’s sensitiveness to the role of context in, and during, the study. As Davison and Martinsons argued, the context in Su (2015) had implications for the design of the study, to the literature relevant to it, and to the research outcome, including the validity of its ﬁndings and of its conclusions. Finally, I strongly support Davison and Martinsons’ assertion that contextual differences are signiﬁcant, and thus the need to encourage the publication of context-aware and context-explicit studies. To move forward on this regard, top-ranked journals will need to overtly recognise the value of context, encouraging authors to be both more open about contextual aspects and more rigorous regarding contextual considerations in their research. However, this is not an easy task: we need a signiﬁcant evolution in the attitude of many Senior Editors, Associate Editors and in particular of reviewers, who either do not ask for context, or, worse, ask that it be removed.

Bourdieu, P. (1990). The Logic of Practice. Cambridge: Polity. ´ ndez, W.D. (2016). Signiﬁcance of ‘contexts’ in ICTD da Silva, A.P. and Ferna projects: Alignment and misalignment of stakeholders’ interests. Paper presented at the 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Kauai, Hawaii, USA. Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. Cambridge: Polity Press in association with Basil Blackwell. Goffman, E. (1974). Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Hong, Y. Y., & Chiu, C. Y. (2001). Toward a paradigm shift: From cross-cultural differences in social cognition to social-cognitive mediation of cultural differences. Social Cognition, 19(3), 181–196. Snow, D. A., Jr. Rochford, E. B., Worden, S. K., & Benford, R. D. (1986). Frame alignment processes, micromobilization, and movement participation. American Sociological Review, 51(4), 464–481. Su, N. (2015). Cultural sensemaking in offshore information technology service suppliers: A cultural frame perspective. MIS Quarterly, 39(4), 959–983. Swidler, A. (1986). Culture in action: symbols and strategies. American Sociological Review, 51(2), 273–286.

About the Author ´ ndez, Ph.D., is a Professor at the School of Walter D. Ferna Information Systems and Technology Management at UNSW Australia. Over the last decade, he has published more than 40 peer-reviewed papers in top international conferences and journals. Walter is the Founding Chair of the AIS SIG GTM and serves at editorial boards of the Journal of the Association for Information Systems (JAIS), the European Journal of Information Systems (EJIS) and Information Systems Research (ISR), among others. His research focuses on managing major IT projects and programmes across organisational and cultural boundaries, Implementation of information technology (IT) projects in developing countries, and achieving value with strategic and transformational deployment of IT.

References
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

