Journal of Information Technology (2016) 31, 382–400
ª 2016 Association for Information Technology Trust All rights reserved 0268-3962/16 www.palgrave.com/journals

JIT - Research Article

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines: EHR-enabled transformation of primary care services
Melike Findikoglu1, Mary Beth Watson-Manheim2
1 2

Ozyegin University, Nisantepe Mah. Orman Sok. Çekmekoy, 34794 Istanbul, Turkey; University of Illinois, Chicago, IL, USA

Correspondence: M Findikoglu, Ozyegin University, Nisantepe Mah. Orman Sok. C ¸ ekmekoy, 34794 Istanbul, Turkey. Tel: +90 216 564 9647; E-mail: melike.ﬁndikoglu@ozyegin.edu.tr

Abstract Information and communication technologies are known to be instrumental in the enhancement of healthcare management capabilities in developing countries. Turkey – a developing country – has undergone a major healthcare transformation marked by the redesign of primary care delivery and the implementation of a nation-wide Electronic Health Records (EHR) system. In this research, presenting Turkey’s case, we investigate the consequences of EHR implementation in developing countries. We argue that to better understand the consequences, we need to link macro-level healthcare goals with micro-level system usage behaviors that actualize the macro-level goals or alternatively result in unintended negative health outcomes. We posit that this linkage is achieved through the meso-level structures, namely the EHR and the organizational context, in which it is embedded. Hence, we examine the EHR’s role in this relationship. Our ﬁndings indicate that EHR usage both enables and constrains the achievement of clinicians’ professional goals in the context of primary care delivery. Moreover, goal alignment between the government agency as the designer of the system and the clinicians inﬂuence the outcomes of the EHRenabled transformation. When the healthcare goals are aligned, the system enables the clinicians to achieve their professional goals and their system usage behaviors converge, contributing to improvements in health outcomes. Contrarily, when the goals are misaligned, the system constrains goal achievement and the clinicians show divergent usage behaviors, including goal abandonment. In turn, goal abandonment may lead to negative consequences and even adversely affect the achievement of population-level healthcare goals in the long run. Journal of Information Technology (2016) 31, 382–400. doi:10.1057/s41265-016-0023-5; published online 1 December 2016 Keywords: ICT-enabled healthcare transformation; developing countries; ICT4D; primary care; electronic health records; affordances

Introduction he transformation of healthcare delivery services is regarded as a key driver of poverty reduction and socioeconomic development (Freedman et al., 2005). There is consensus both in academia and among international development agencies that healthcare-focused information and communication technology (ICT) initiatives can substantially enhance a country’s healthcare management capabilities and support the government in the provisioning of public healthcare services (Braa et al., 2004; Madon et al., 2007). Furthermore, it

T

has been thought that ICT implementation is likely to enhance the quality and the efﬁciency of patient care while reducing the associated costs (OECD, 2010). Hence, ICTs have been regarded as both a remedy for developing countries to solve nation-wide healthcare problems and a means to stimulate growth through the enhancement of public healthcare. Motivated by these promises and the requirements of international development agencies and donors like the World Health Organization (WHO) and the World Bank (Kimaro

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

383

and Nhampossa, 2007), many developing countries have devoted a considerable amount of resources to implement various health-focused ICTs. For example, in an effort to transform its ailing healthcare infrastructure and serve rural communities more efﬁciently, India has invested in population databases, geographic information systems, telemedicine systems, hand-held devices for staff, and information portals (Bodvala, 2002). Similarly, Zanzibar has streamlined collection, storage, analysis, and reporting of health data via a Health Information System in order to attain data-driven decision making (Lungo and Igira, 2008). Many countries, including Kenya, Haiti, Uganda, Brazil, Peru, and Turkey have implemented electronic health records (EHR) systems and shifted from paper-based to system-based medical data capture as part of broad healthcare transformation initiatives (Fraser et al., 2005; Williams and Boren, 2008). In this study, we investigate the consequences of EHRenabled transformations of primary care delivery in developing countries. Primary care is considered to have a crucial role in dealing with complex health problems in a society. It is characterized by four cardinal functions of universal access, including: (1) ﬁrst contact for the patient; (2) providing patient-focused care over time; (3) addressing all healthrelated needs; and (4) integrating care received at multiple outlets (Ocek et al., 2014). Serving as the repository of a patient’s medical records, an EHR system enables the achievement of fundamental primary care delivery goals, such as the systematic recording of patient treatment, efﬁcient and effective prescribing, and better tracking of patient outcomes (Petrakaki et al., 2014; Williams and Boren, 2008). Yet, many developing countries that have implemented different versions of EHR were not able to reap the full beneﬁts of this technology due to the ‘‘design-reality’’ gap caused by the direct transfer of technology from developed countries without paying attention to local needs, as well as resource limitations in terms of hardware, software, and technical support (Heeks 2003, 2006; Williams and Boren, 2008). Moreover, beneﬁts might not be realized unless the EHR implementation is launched as part of the government’s nation-wide health agenda, backed by strong commitment to reform (Luna et al., 2014). Hence, the degree of success in EHR implementation varies across settings due to factors such as local needs, resources, and government policies. To unfold the implications of the EHR-enabled primary care transformation, we chose Turkey, an Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) member and a developing country, as our research setting. Turkey has been undergoing a substantial healthcare transformation via the Health Transformation Program. The macro-level Health Transformation Program entailed numerous meso-level structural changes, including programs, policies, standards, and governance frameworks (Atun 2015; Turan and Palvia, 2014; Yasar, 2011). Of these structural changes, the redesign of primary care delivery under a family medicine care delivery model is of special interest in our study. To operationalize this new delivery model, Turkey implemented a nation-wide EHR, namely a family medicine information system, under a top-down approach and mandated its use for all family medicine personnel. Consequently, Turkey reported impressive improvement in major health-related development indicators such as immunization rates, infant mortality rate, and maternal mortality rate.

Yet, we argue that the population-level statistics do not adequately reﬂect the underlying change in micro-level care delivery routines that emerge through the usage of EHR. Analyzing merely macro-level phenomenon, one may overlook the role of meso-level structures and mechanisms, how they shape micro-level routines, and whether or not they lead to variations in service delivery. Similarly, by looking only at macro-level development indicators, one may implicitly assume that the transformation produces uniform results across the population, ignoring the possible variation in service levels across patient groups. We posit that in order to understand the consequences of the EHR-enabled transformation of primary care delivery, it is necessary to analyze micro-level phenomenon, such as the routines that are performed while using EHR. Thus, to answer the research question on how EHR usage shapes the routine delivery of primary care services for sustainable development beneﬁts, we developed a multi-level research framework. Drawing on perspectives from Information Systems (IS), ICT for Development (ICT4D), and Health Informatics literatures, and utilizing the affordances concept (Gibson, 1986) as our theoretical lens, we adopt a qualitative approach to investigate this multi-level phenomenon. Our analysis highlights the interactions between macro, meso, and micro levels of primary care transformation, looking particularly at the crucial role of the meso-level organizational context and the EHR that both enable and constrain clinicians’ usage behaviors, as well as micro-level care delivery routines. Equally important, our study has practical and policy-related implications for the governments of developing countries and ICT designers. We acknowledge that a development-focused perspective, a top-down approach, and an inﬂexible information system with enhanced control by the central authority are crucial for the success of a macro-level healthcare transformation in a developing country – especially at the initial stages of the transformation. Contrastingly, our study shows that this setup might result in adverse effects and unintended variations in micro-level care delivery routines when clinicians’ practice-related, professional goals and requirements are not aligned with those of the designers, which are reﬂected in meso-level structural designs. Therefore, it is important for the governments of developing countries to be aware of these possible consequences and to address the requirements of both clinicians and patients while designing a nation-wide EHR. The paper is organized as follows: We ﬁrst provide theoretical background on macro-level healthcare transformation with a focus on primary care delivery and EHR implementation in developing countries. Following this overview, we present a multi-level research framework to link population-level healthcare goals and EHR usage behaviors. In doing so, we discuss how the theoretical lens can be leveraged to investigate EHR and EHR-enabled care delivery practices, namely the technological affordances concept. Next, we describe our methodologies for data collection and analysis. Finally, in the ﬁndings section, we present our empirical study and analysis on Turkey’s healthcare transformation; structural changes in primary care redesign via the introduction of the family medicine model and EHR; and EHR usage behaviors. The paper

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines 384

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

concludes with a discussion of theoretical contributions, implications to practice and policy, limitations, and future research topics. Theoretical foundation In this section, we ﬁrst discuss the role of EHR in primary care transformation in developing countries and summarize the beneﬁts of, as well as barriers to, the successful EHR adoption that enables improvement in healthcare delivery. We argue that in order to understand the drivers of success, we need to examine the emerging (or non-emerging) healthcare delivery routines that are enabled or constrained by EHR usage. Addressing this gap in the literature, we next present our multi-level research framework, which links population-level healthcare goals with micro-level EHR usage behaviors. Finally, to further deepen our understanding of emergent usage behaviors, we utilize the technological affordances concept as an analytical lens. The transformation of EHR-enabled primary care The primary care concept represents an integrative approach to preventive medicine under a patient-centered model. It is characterized by four cardinal functions: (1) First contact: going to primary care ﬁrst for each new need or problem; (2) Longitudinality: patient-focused care over time and long-term relationship between physician and patient; (3) Comprehensiveness: addressing all health-related needs; and (4) Coordination: integrating care when patients have been seen elsewhere (Ocek et al., 2014; Unger et al., 2002). In developing countries, where underﬁnanced and poorly managed public services lead to low quality and inequitable healthcare provisions, the role of primary care is pivotal for dealing with complex health problems, as well as for providing universal access to affordable healthcare (De Maeseneer et al., 2008). It is through the transformation of primary care that developing countries can gain substantial improvements in their health and economic development (Kekki, 2004). Thus, primary care has a central position in transforming nation-wide healthcare delivery and has become a high priority for the governments of developing countries. Transformation of healthcare delivery is facilitated and actualized via the implementation of numerous health information systems (Williams and Boren, 2008). There is a growing consensus among international agencies, notably the WHO, government authorities, and researchers that improved health information systems (such as EHR, e-prescription, telemedicine, hand-held devices, and health portals) can signiﬁcantly contribute to addressing and remedying healthcare delivery problems in developing countries (Madon et al., 2007; OECD, 2010). Among these ICTs, EHR systems function as repositories of patients’ health records that enable computer-based, longitudinal tracking of health (Petrakaki et al., 2014). Therefore, EHR systems have the potential to improve the capacity, efﬁciency, and quality of healthcare delivery in developing countries (Williams and Boren, 2008), enabling them to fulﬁll fundamental primary care delivery goals. EHR usage provides signiﬁcant beneﬁts for developing countries at the macro level as well as at the clinical practice level (Blaya et al., 2010; Luna et al., 2013, 2014; Petrakaki et al., 2014; Williams and Boren, 2008). At the macro level,

EHR implementation can enhance the healthcare capacity of a country by facilitating the acquisition of timely and accurate managerial and epidemiological information and enabling effective resource allocation (Clifford et al., 2008). The ability to track and estimate medication needs in advance helps governments negotiate lower prices (Blaya et al., 2010). EHR usage can also lead to the improved provisioning of healthcare services, as well as enhanced planning and decision-making capacities in local communities (Braa et al., 2004; Williams and Boren, 2008). Finally, the central storage and backup of data ensure uninterrupted access to medical records in case of a disaster (Blaya et al., 2010; Williams and Boren, 2008). In terms of clinical practice, EHR implementation facilitates the systematic recording of patient treatment and sharing of patient data among clinicians and across care levels. This allows a patient’s medical history to become central to diagnosis and treatment practices. The analysis of a patient’s medical history can also lead to the improved tracking of patient outcomes. Standardized workﬂows embedded in EHR increase the efﬁciency of scheduling prescription renewals and vaccination administration (Williams and Boren, 2008). Consequently, EHR usage has been shown to reduce inappropriate variations in clinical practice and medical errors in labs and prescribing of medication (Blaya et al., 2010; Luna et al., 2013, 2014; Williams and Boren, 2008). Yet, the mere presence of EHR does not assure efﬁcient or high-quality care (Chaudhry et al., 2006). Even in developed countries, EHR usage might be constrained due to technology-related challenges or the lack of complementary structural changes and support (Miller and Sim, 2004). Developing countries face additional challenges. First, they tend to import and implement EHRs that are designed for developed countries (Luna et al., 2013). Doing so ignores differences in culture, skill sets, and technological infrastructure, which may render EHR implementation relatively ineffective (Heeks, 2003, 2006; Williams and Boren, 2008). Second, attaining the resources and skills required for EHR implementation is difﬁcult in developing countries where resource allocation decisions are competing with more basic needs, such as food, education, and even basic healthcare services (Luna et al., 2014). While computer hardware and software are often donated, the lack of adequate technical training and ongoing maintenance is a considerable barrier to successful EHR adoption (Blaya et al., 2010; Luna et al., 2014; Williams and Boren, 2008). Finally, the absence of a strong government commitment to invest in EHR is also a major obstacle for implementing and sustaining EHR initiatives (Williams and Boren, 2008). Research suggests that nationalor regional-level EHR implementations should be part of a comprehensive nation-wide health IT agenda, supported by well-deﬁned regulation to address privacy and security concerns (Luna et al., 2014). Prior studies also report that EHR systems that were successfully implemented in developing countries may be abandoned subsequently, particularly when donor funds are exhausted (Braa et al., 2004; Kimaro and Nhampossa, 2007; Kimaro and Sahay, 2007). Hence, both initial and ongoing government support and commitment is crucial for implementation success. In sum, EHR implementation can play a signiﬁcant role in achieving improved population-level healthcare outcomes in developing countries, speciﬁcally in the primary care context;

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

385

yet, there are complex barriers to successful adoption. Furthermore, improved macro-level health indicators alone do not provide insight into advancements in micro-level care delivery practices. To understand how EHR implementation enables improvements in healthcare services, we need to examine the supporting routines and practices that emerge (or do not emerge) during routine usage of the EHR. In the next section, we elaborate on the linkage between achievement of population-level healthcare goals and the emergence of clinicians’ EHR usage behaviors that support primary care delivery. Linking population-level goals to clinicians’ EHR usage behaviors Our literature review on EHR implementations in developing countries did not uncover studies exploring the linkage between macro-level goals of governments and international development agencies and micro-level behaviors of clinicians who are involved in the delivery of healthcare services. Thus, we turn to an emerging stream of IS literature that takes a multi-level perspective to examine linkages between macrolevel objectives and micro-level behaviors, and the role of enterprise information systems, including EHR systems, in this relationship. Combining institutional and sense-making theories, Gosain (2004) theorizes about the relationship between enterprise information systems as the carrier of institutional logic and resulting user behaviors. This study contends that the conﬁguration of an enterprise information system is subject to extended institutional forces, such as software vendors who aim to embed best practices into the design. When adopted by organizations, the software conﬁguration, while sometimes customizable, constrains activities and shapes the cognitive framing of possibilities for user behavior. Building on this work, Jensen et al. (2009) investigates how and why physicians adopt EHR by linking three levels of analysis: the country-level healthcare context, the EHR implementation, and the actions of physicians as they used the system in the context of care delivery. The results indicate that the physicians interpreted the institutional logic built into the system and developed ways of working that either

embraced or rejected use of the system. In another study, linking macro-level institutional logics with micro-level ¨hring (2014) highlight the emerbehaviors, Hultin and Ma gence of interwoven organizational routines and visualization technologies that integrate institutional logic into local practices in a hospital environment. These studies position enterprise information systems as the carrier of macro-level institutional goals that facilitate the emergence of user behaviors supporting these goals. We posit that this representation points to an intermediate level, or meso-level, that links the macro-level institutional objectives with micro-level behaviors. Although rarely found in IS studies, the introduction of meso-level analysis has a long history in many disciplines, especially sociology, to investigate relationships between macro and micro levels (Weber, 2012). Building on this work, we employ a multi-level approach to analyze the role of the EHR in the linkage between the macrolevel goals for healthcare transformation and the micro-level behaviors of clinicians in the care delivery. Figure 1 illustrates our multi-level research framework with EHR positioned at the meso level, linking the population-level goals of governments and development agencies with the micro-level EHR usage behaviors of clinicians. In line with Jensen et al. (2009), and a long line of IS research taking a socio-technical perspective, we include in our model the organizational context – namely the family medicine care delivery model, in which the EHR is embedded. As a result, our framework suggests that the combination of the mesolevel organizational context and EHR design inﬂuences user behaviors at the micro level and, ultimately, the development of routines that are likely to enable the achievement of population-level healthcare goals. However, routines of technology use are not embodied by technology, but rather emerge from the recurrent use of technology over time (Orlikowski, 2000). In order to fully answer our research question, we aim to develop a deeper understanding of the emergence of EHR-enabled healthcare delivery practices that achieves macro-level goals. Hence, we employ the technological affordances concept as a lens to investigate the emergence of these behaviors.

Figure 1 Linking macro-level healthcare goals with micro-level EHR usage routines.

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines 386

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

Technological affordances and EHR usage behaviors The affordance concept has roots in ecological psychology (Gibson, 1986). The affordances of an object are the emergent possibilities or potentials for action perceived by the actors who behave in that environment (Stoffregen, 2003). In the IS context, a technological affordance is a property of the relationship between the IT artifact (the object) and the user (the actor), instead of being only either the property of the actor or the object (Fayard and Weeks, 2014; Hutchby, 2001; Leonardi and Barley, 2008; Volkoff and Strong, 2013; Zammuto et al., 2007). The actualization of a technological affordance is an individual process; each user perceives and interprets the material properties in light of their goals. Users having different goals and work practices may enact different affordances using the same technology, or reject, ignore, or misinterpret an affordance actualized by the others (Fayard and Weeks, 2014; Petrakaki et al., 2014; Strong et al., 2014; Volkoff and Strong, 2013). Thus, it’s not the technology per se that enables or constrains users’ behaviors, but rather, it is the interaction between a goaloriented actor and the features or design of the technology (Stoffregen, 2003). Prior studies rooted in the affordances concept point to several possibilities for user responses to ICT implementation and subsequent organizational change. When required behaviors lead to individual goal achievement, users will adopt technology-imposed routines. In that case, users

change their action patterns to use the new technology, thus actualize the affordances and generate new routines of behavior (Strong et al., 2014; Leonardi, 2011). Alternatively, if new technology-enabled routines do not support users’ goals, then they either reject the technology or attempt to change it instead of adopting the required behavior (Leonardi, 2011). Our framework proposes that these EHRenabled routines of behavior reinforce the macro-level logic conﬁgured in the EHR, leading to the achievement of population-level healthcare goals (Gosain, 2004). In the next section, we apply our framework to conduct a multi-level analysis of primary care delivery practices in the aftermath of an EHR implementation as part of a macro-level healthcare transformation in Turkey. Methods In this study, our objective is to analyze the micro-level implications of a macro-level transition via implementation of meso-level structures. For that purpose, we employed a qualitative approach that enabled us to gather context-rich data on the phenomenon under study (Miles and Huberman, 1994), across the macro level (the Health Transformation Program in Turkey), the meso level (family medicine care delivery model and EHR), and the micro level (system usage in care delivery). We triangulated three main data sources across levels: (1) secondary data from publicly available

Table 1 Data Collection by source, type, and levels

Source Secondary data

Originator MoH MoH TSKB MoH MoH MoH MoH World Bank MoH MoH Family Medicine Association FMIS software vendors Physicians Nurses Midwives Researchers

Type Strategy Documents Evaluation Reports Reports Presentation Legislation Legislation Reports

Associated level Macro Macro Macro Macro Macro Meso Meso Meso

Example Strategic Plan 2013–2017 HTP Assessment Report 2003–2011 Health Industry Sector Report (2014) Activity Report (2002) Transformation in Health (2003) Family Medicine Law #5258 and amendments Decree on Application of Family Medicine and amendments Turkey Performance-Based Contracting Scheme in Family Medicine–Design and Achievements Report #77029 Classiﬁcation of Family Medicine Unit and Centers News, Information, Regulations News, Information, Regulations Manuals/Tutorials/Demo videos

Legislation Meso E-Health Portal Macro Meso Webpage Meso System Meso Documentation Micro Meso Micro

Semistructured interviews Nonparticipant observations

FMIS Usage Family Medicine Center Context

MoH Ministry of Health, HTP Health Transformation Program, TSKB Turkiye Sinai Kalkinma Bankasi (Turkish Industrial Development Bank), FMIS Family Medicine Information System

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

387

documents and information about the Health Transformation Program, family medicine model, and related systems; (2) semi-structured interviews with family medicine personnel (such as physicians, nurses, and midwives); and (3) nonparticipant observations at family medicine centers. Table 1 summarizes the data sources, types, and examples linked to the above-mentioned levels. First, we collected documents including strategy and policy documents, action plans, reports, and legislation issued by the Ministry of Health, as well as WHO/World Bank reports, statistics, and press releases. We also extracted information from the Ministry’s e-Health portal and family medicine associations’ webpages. This data helped us understand the context in which the ICT-enabled transformation took place. Second, we conducted semi-structured interviews with family medicine personnel, including physicians, nurses, midwives, and medical secretaries who served under the newly created care delivery model. We drew our sample from family medicine personnel working in lower socio-economic status neighborhoods in the peripheries of Istanbul. We chose Istanbul as the location of our study because it is the largest and most diversiﬁed city in Turkey and thus represents a microcosm of the varied population across this heterogeneous country. Moreover, we particularly focused on lower socio-economic neighborhoods, which corresponded to ‘‘underdeveloped’’ or ‘‘underserved’’ segments of Turkish society, since the majority of their inhabitants were immigrants from rural and poorer areas of Turkey. We recruited our participants through personal and professional networks and via snowball sampling. We created an interview protocol consisting of four main sections with open-ended questions

where we inquired about (1) the family medicine center and the proﬁle of the patients who were visiting that center; (2) the interviewee’s background and role in the care delivery; (3) the EHR version and its features; and (4) the interviewee’s system usage behaviors. Table 2 illustrates the structure of the interview protocol and presents sample questions. We interviewed a total of 18 family medicine personnel, including 11 family medicine physicians, six nurses/midwives, and one medical secretary. Three physicians were specialized in family medicine; others were general practitioners with primary care experience. Physicians’ tenure in practice ranged from ﬁve to 30 years, with an average of 16. We conducted interviews with six nurses/midwives paired with the interviewed physicians. The average tenure of the support personnel was 6.5 years. They all had experience in secondary-level care services, either at private or public hospitals. The medical secretary we interviewed held a position that existed only in larger family medicine centers. She was responsible for patient admission and registration. All interviewees joined the family medicine care delivery model when it launched in Istanbul in November 2010. Table 3 summarizes the demographics of the interviewees. As a supplemental interview, we conversed with the Deputy Head of Istanbul Public Health Organization to learn more about the trajectory of the change initiatives in the primary care domain. This interview enabled us to better understand the Ministry of Health’s perspective on the family medicine model. Finally, we conducted non-participant observations at family medicine centers. These observations increased our understanding of the service provision context, patient proﬁles, and system usage. Some interviewees offered a

Table 2 Interview protocol

Section 1. FMC & proﬁle of patients 2. Interviewee background & role in the care delivery

Sample question Category and size of the FMC Patient proﬁle, patient statistics (number of registered patients, number of outpatients per day) For how many years have you been in this profession? Where and in which capacity have you worked? What is your education and specialization if any? What is your job deﬁnition? Which FMIS do you use? For how long have you been using the system? Were you involved in the selection of this system? What were your criteria? Have you submitted any development requests? What are available features/functionalities of the system? Please describe your system use on a typical day Which functionalities do you use most? Have you experienced any difﬁculties/barriers during use of the system? Please describe In your opinion, what would you need from the system? What would help you to be more effective or to provide better patient care?

3. FMIS & its features

4. FMIS usage behavior

FMC Family Medicine Center, FMIS Family Medicine Information System

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines 388 Table 3 Demographics of interviewees

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

Interviewee FMP YA FMP OK FMP SS FMP MB FMP EK FMP CC FMP GA FMP MA FMP SG FMP SK FMP TD N1 FMC BS N2 FMC BS N3 FMC BS N4 FMC BS N1FMC B5 N2 FMC B5 Medical Secretary FMC BS

Gender Female Female Female Female Male Female Female Male Male Female Female Female Female Female Female Female Female Female

Tenure (years) 20 12 19 16 15 30 5 6 24 18 14 7 9 6 6 6 5

Education GP GP GP GP SP in FM GP

Experience Administrator at City – PHO Physician at health center Vice President at PHO responsible for Maternal and Infant Care Physician at health centers Administrator at Municipality – PHO Physician at Maternal and Infant Care Organization Physician at Emergency Unit at public hospitals Family medicine physician Physician at primary care institutions such as university clinic, City Sport Organization Physician at public hospital and health center Physician at Emergency Unit at public hospitals Physician at Maternal and Infant Care Organization Physician at public hospitals

Experience in pre-FM health center model Yes Yes Other primary care experience

No No Other primary care experience GP Yes GP No SP in FM Other primary care experience SP in FM Other primary care experience GP Physician at Emergency Unit at public hospitals None Medical director at pharmaceutical company Midwife Private hospital/newborn clinic No Midwife University hospital/surgery No Nurse Private & public hospital No Nurse Public hospital No Nurse Private hospital/surgery No Midwife University hospital No Medical Rapporteur in radiology department, patient No Administrator consultant at a private medical center

FM family medicine, FMP family medicine physician, FMC Family Medicine Center, GP general practitioner/SP in FM: Specialized in Family Medicine, N nurse, PHO Public Health Organization

walk-through of the EHR; we supplemented these observations with tutorials and training videos prepared by the EHR vendors. The interviews and observations took place from November 2013 to January 2014 at the physicians’ ofﬁces and nurses’ workstations. The interviews averaged approximately 1.5 h, and ranged from 30 min to 2.5 h. The interviewees did not allow us to record the interviews, only the medical secretary agreed to have the interview tape recorded. Therefore, while conducting the interviews, the ﬁrst author wrote the whole conversation in shorthand and performed extensive note taking to document observations before and after the interviews. The interviews were conducted in Turkish. Immediately after completion of the interviews, notes were converted to longhand by the interviewer. A professional interpreter translated these transcripts into English for analysis and archival purposes. All documents published in Turkish were also translated into English by the same interpreter. In May 2014, both authors followed up with the majority of the physicians to clarify any ambiguities, to reﬁne the narratives, and to enhance prior observations. Our data analysis consisted of two parts: (1) the analysis of secondary data (such as the documents and information derived from webpages) on the Health Transformation

Program; and (2) the analysis of interview transcripts and observation notes. We employed explanation building as a method of analysis, ‘‘a form of pattern-matching in which the analysis is carried out by building a textual explanation of the case’’ (Miles and Huberman, 1994). First, we carried out a close reading and screening of the interviews and observational data. We coded this data based on the interview questions regarding primary care services, service provision context, patient proﬁles, the Ministry’s role, EHR features, EHR usage behaviors, and associated beneﬁts and constraints. Both authors ﬁrst conducted coding individually, then compared and modiﬁed the codes jointly. Once we reached convergence and saturation, we ﬁnalized the ﬁrst round of coding and recoded all interviews for consistency purposes as suggested by qualitative researchers (Miles and Huberman, 1994). Next, we compared, contrasted, and integrated these ﬁrst-order concepts to further explore the relationships between them. This approach facilitated the emergence of higher-order themes, such as affordance types, constraint types, developing country context, healthcare service provision context, institutional and practice-related goals, users’ backgrounds and usage behaviors. For affordances, we used Volkoff and Strong’s (2013) high-level classiﬁcation system as a guide. Our

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

389

analysis evolved iteratively and we continued until we had a clear grasp of the emerging theoretical relationships in the data. Findings In this section, we investigate the implications of Turkey’s ICT-enabled transformation in primary care delivery with a multi-level analysis. First, at the macro level, we examine the Health Transformation Program and its outcomes with respect to development. Then, we analyze the underlying meso-level structures, namely the family medicine care delivery model and the supporting Family Medicine Information System. Next we show how these structures operationalize the Health Transformation Program. Finally, at the micro level, we explore the implications of the new structures for care delivery practices through EHR usage behaviors of the family medicine personnel. Macro level: health transformation program and developmental improvement In Turkey, healthcare services have been provided and regulated by the government via the Ministry of Health. This branch of the government exerts extensive control over the employment and education of health personnel, establishment and administration of hospitals, medication procurement, and prescription – for both public and private organizations. The government is highly involved in the provisioning of healthcare services, since a substantial portion of health services are rendered via public health organizations. Out of 1517 hospitals, 56 % are public, and state-run hospitals provide 60 % of bed capacity (Turkiye Sinai Kalkinma Bankasi, 2014). Historically, Turkey has been struggling with numerous problems in provisioning of public healthcare services, especially in terms of resource availability and redistribution. One of the major issues has been the absence of patient referral to secondary-level services. As a result, patients have been utilizing public hospitals’ outpatient clinics, including university hospitals, as the ﬁrst point of contact for even minor complaints. This situation led to the inappropriate use of valuable specialized secondary and tertiary healthcare services (Tatar and Kanavos, 2006). Moreover, prescription practices were not fully regulated throughout the care delivery chain, causing ﬁnancial deprivation. Governments attacked these persistent problems via health sector reforms, yet with limited success. Chronic political and economic conditions acted against the reforms, until a single party government was elected to ofﬁce in 2001 (Cayhan, 2008). A strong governing power, coupled with a mandate for extensive reforms in all public policy areas, facilitated an ambitious program to restructure the national health system – the Health Transformation Program. In fact, one of the driving forces behind this transformation was Turkey’s prospect of joining the European Union (EU). To fulﬁll the EU’s membership requirements, the Turkish government designed and implemented the Health Transformation Program (Turan and Palvia, 2014). The Health Transformation Program was compiled under the directions of several international development agencies such as the World Bank, the WHO, and the EU (Turan and

Palvia, 2014; Yasar, 2011). Its primary objectives were to improve the governance, efﬁciency, and long-term ﬁscal sustainability of the healthcare system, as well as to increase patient and caregiver satisfaction (Turan and Palvia, 2014). The Health Transformation Program involved substantial institutional and structural changes, including the administrative and functional reorganization of the Ministry of Health, introduction of a general health insurance program, and restructuring of healthcare delivery (Akdag, 2009; Atun, 2015; Yasar, 2011). One of the core components of the Health Transformation Program was the redesign of the primary care system by creating a new specialty and service delivery approach under the concept of family medicine (World Bank, 2013). This change represented a supply side reform to control the health services provision and value chain, minimize corruption and ﬁnancial deprivation, and increase access to preventive health services. The target for development was to fulﬁll the Millennium Development Goals established by the United Nations in 2001, particularly to reduce child mortality and improve maternal health (Ministry of Health of Turkey, 2012). Under the Health Transformation Program, Turkey invested heavily in health-focused ICTs including a national e-health platform, ‘‘Saglik-NET’’ (Turan and Palvia, 2014). These investments yielded impressive success as the productivity of hospitals improved signiﬁcantly (Atun 2015; Sahin et al., 2011). Access to healthcare was also enhanced with an increase in the number of per capita visits to healthcare facilities from 3.2 in 2002 to 8.2 in 2011 (Ministry of Health of Turkey, 2012). The government strictly controlled the prescription practices through e-prescription, such as enforcing a match between the diagnosis and prescribed medication, analyzing prescription patterns by physician or particular medication such as antibiotics, alerting physicians in case of above-average prescription of a speciﬁc medication in a given period. Moreover, the government monitored the whole process until pharmacies got paid by the Social Security Fund following patient’s pickup of medication and, thus, could avoid overpayment at that end. In terms of developmental outcomes, major health-related indicators such as maternal mortality rate and infant mortality rate improved considerably, decreasing to 15.5 per 100,000 live births and 7.7 per 1,000 live births in 2011, respectively. The rate of full immunization coverage also increased to 97 % in 2011 (Ministry of Health of Turkey, 2012). Thus, at the macro level, the Health Transformation Program fulﬁlled its population-level healthcare goals. Meso-level: structural changes in primary care The macro-level transformation was operationalized via implementation of several meso-level structures. In the primary care domain, the Ministry of Health reorganized the care delivery and introduced the family medicine model. Central to the new model was an EHR, the Family Medicine Information System. Family medicine care delivery model Prior to the Health Transformation Program, public primary care services were rendered via health centers and maternal/ infant care centers in Turkey. Following the change, the functions of these centers were divided between two separate

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines 390

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

organizations: public health centers and independent family medicine units. The former performed community-level activities, such as collection of statistics, follow-up on diseases, environmental and occupational health services, and school-oriented health services. Independent family medicine units, on the other hand, were responsible for healthcare delivery (Tatar et al., 2011). The transition from health centers to family medicine units started with the implementation of a pilot program in 2005 in the relatively small city of Duzce. The transition was completed when Istanbul became the last city to adopt the new care delivery model in November 2010.1 To regulate the provisioning of family medicine services, the Ministry enacted a dedicated law and relevant bylaws.2 According to the law, each household was initially assigned to a family medicine unit based on the address. Each unit consisted of a family medicine physician (either a general practitioner or a family medicine specialist) and one support personnel, either a nurse or a midwife who was contracted by the physician (Akdag, 2009). The main duty of the physician was primary care delivery to the assigned patients/households with a special focus on maternal and infant health. Nurses and midwives were responsible for conducting follow-ups of pregnant women, new mothers, and infants up to 5 years, speciﬁcally for vaccination purposes. They also performed other care services when required by the physicians, such as family planning, taking blood specimens, and wound care. Nevertheless, the ultimate accountability of the family medicine unit remained with the physician. After assignment, citizens could later change their family medicine unit but their previous health records (except medication information) could not be transferred to the new unit. The physicians reported that the lack of integration across units caused the loss of patient health information and limited the longitudinality of primary care. Physicians were responsible for serving a population of approximately 4000 citizens. The number of patients seen by physician per day varied between 40 and 70, but could be as high as 90 depending on the season. The physicians reported that the workload was the main obstacle for quality and delivery of comprehensive care. Despite the availability of a central appointment system via Internet or call center, the patients from lower socio-economic neighborhoods tended to ‘‘drop by’’ rather than making appointments in advance, or to visit the unit frequently to cater to nonhealth-related needs such as socialization. According to Physician SS: We go to a movie to socialize, but they come here. I have one such patient who is coming every week. She says she has a wound in her hand, but there is not even a scratch. The physicians preferred not to mandate appointments because the central system would allow them to treat only four patients per hour, ignoring the patients waiting and protesting outside their ofﬁce. Physician C explained, The daily number of clinical examinations is not under 50. The state has given me the right to receive patients with appointments. I have to treat 4 patients per hour. This is not possible; there will be a noisy clamor in front of my door.

Under the new arrangement, the family medicine personnel earned higher salaries compared to their peers working at public hospitals. Physicians’ salaries were based on the size and characteristics of the population they were responsible for, adjusted by the socio-economic development level of the neighborhood. Physicians received monthly allowance for general expenses based on purchasing parity of the neighborhood and the category of the clinic. The performance of both nurses and physicians was reﬂected in their salaries by a negative performance metric in which they might be penalized up to 20 % if they failed to meet targets set for vaccination, pregnancy, and maternity follow-ups (World Bank, 2013). Based on these rules, the family medicine personnel were ﬁnancially motivated to primarily serve these patient groups in order to avoid salary cuts at the expense of other patients, such as those with chronic diseases. Some physicians expressed concerns about the long-term effects of this trade-off on the overall health situation in Turkey. Although access to preventive care services was substantially enhanced after the launch of the family medicine model, the government delayed implementation of the referral chain across care levels. Thus, patients continued to choose which level to visit as the ﬁrst contact. At the time of writing, the Ministry of Health was preparing a new regulation to implement the referral chain and restrict direct access to secondary care level without a family medicine physician’s referral, except in emergencies (Kaplan, 2016). The family medicine physicians’ associations approached this restriction cautiously, arguing that this change would further increase the workload of the physicians.3 Family medicine information system The linchpin of the family medicine care delivery model was the Family Medicine Information System (FMIS), a limited EHR. We will refer to this system as FMIS for the remainder of this case study as this instance of EHR is designed to speciﬁcally support the Health Transformation Program in Turkey. The use of the FMIS was mandated for the delivery of family medicine services and participants reported that the provisioning of many services was not possible without the system. The system was designed to enhance care delivery efﬁciency via standardized workﬂows and templates for examination, diagnosis, prescription, and visit/vaccination follow-ups. Users were able to take notes, devise warnings, set schedules, and personalize the interface to a certain extent. The FMIS produced high-level patient medical history, albeit limited to the visits to the registered family medicine physician, and facilitated patients’ health analysis via ﬁlters and search functions, excluding the physician’s detailed notes. The physicians also used the system to furnish formal health reports (such as absence reports) to be presented to the authorities. The architecture, core functionalities, and data structure of the system were strictly designed by the Ministry of Health to address its objectives and priorities, with family medicine personnel having little say in the design of the system. A few participants stated that only minimal requirements were taken into account like interface design or report formats. System development and maintenance were outsourced to multiple local software ﬁrms that were validated, certiﬁed, and contracted by the Ministry of

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

391

Health. The EHR was integrated with other centralized systems, such as the national identity directory, central appointment system, pharmacy system, and social security system. As a result, the Ministry of Health was able to exert enhanced control across the primary care delivery chain. Every physician had a stand-alone version of the system installed on his or her computer. The physician’s nurse or midwife could access that instance via a different user proﬁle with limited access rights, provided that the physician’s computer was onsite and logged on. Even within the same family medicine center with multiple collocated units, the system instances were not integrated across physicians. Each physician had to maintain his or her own backup and periodically transfer patient, visit, and prescription data to the Ministry of Health’s central database for storage and analysis. During site visits, we observed four different versions of the family medicine information system. Core functionalities were identical across these versions; the user interfaces varied by layout and visual effects. Some versions offered additional features, such as links to other websites and search engines. Hence, our analysis – based on observations, walkthroughs, and tutorials – revealed no material differences across the versions. Micro level: FMIS usage behaviors To understand the changes at the micro level, we analyzed the usage of the system, how the system enabled or limited actual care delivery routines, and how the clinicians responded to the system features. For that purpose, we utilized the affordances concept and the categorization of Volkoff and Strong (2013) and Strong et al. (2014). Based on participants’ reports and our observations, we identiﬁed two different usage patterns across clinicians: (1) common behaviors, marked as convergent usage behavior; and (2) variant behaviors, marked as divergent usage behavior. Participants reported convergent behaviors in situations when the system enabled the fulﬁllment of professional, practice-related goals. In those cases, the objectives of the designer and the users were aligned. Contrarily, we observed divergent behaviors in situations where the system limited the participants’ goal achievement due to misalignment of the designers’ and the users’ objectives. We report our ﬁndings below. FMIS affordances and consequences for care delivery All participants emphasized that the FMIS supported the performance of core clinical activities such as patient registration, examination, prescribing, and regular followups – especially for priority patients such as pregnant women, new mothers, and infants up to 5 years. The system facilitated the systematic and structured recording of patients’ medical information and later analysis of these records. This analysis was conducted via standard templates, ﬁlters, and queries, which was not possible during the previous ‘‘health center’’ era. The system also enabled family medicine personnel to practice in a standardized way, saving time in examinations and avoiding paper-based procedures, except for house calls. In particular, prescribing patient medications was very efﬁcient. Using enhanced scheduling and reminder features, clinicians, both physicians and nurses,

were able to easily provide accepted standards of care for certain patient groups. This was the case for the immunization of pregnant women and children. The system was also designed to support physician administrative practices. Use of the scheduling features for the priority patient group helped family medicine personnel avoid negative performance penalties incurred when these groups were not attended to as required by the Ministry of Health. By setting user proﬁles, the physicians exerted strict control over access to system features and data, and thus manage the activities of nurses and midwives. By doing so, physicians could improve user validation and data security. Additionally, at the centers where all collocated family medicine units were using the same FMIS version, kiosk implementation and integration enhanced patient trafﬁc management and physician substitution. Using the framework by Volkoff and Strong (2013) and Strong et al. (2014), we grouped the commonly reported beneﬁts of system usage into affordance categories. Conﬁrming prior studies, we found that the EHR provided basic recording affordance as well as standardizing, monitoring, analysis, integrating, and controlling affordances. As described above, the systematic monitoring, scheduling, and treating priority patients were important goals for all clinicians and the Ministry of Health. The system was designed to enable users to efﬁciently perform these activities. System usage was strictly regulated by the Ministry for recording, standardizing, and priority patient monitoring, leaving users little choice as to actualizing the affordances. Physicians had more discretion about the actualization of the analysis, as well as integrating and controlling affordances. Table 4 summarizes our ﬁndings on affordances that were common across the family medicine units, indicating convergent clinicians’ usage behaviors. FMIS constraints and consequences for care delivery While much of the system usage was described as beneﬁcial by family medicine personnel, we observed that the design of the system addressed primarily the goals of the Ministry of Health. The actual role of the system was limited mainly to transaction processing, focusing on particular services provided to particular patient groups. This situation frustrated some participants, such as Physician TD, who said: The system is actually very primitive. The software has been developed for collecting and transmitting data [to the Ministry of Health] only. Many participants reported that some system features (or lack thereof) limited their ability to fulﬁll their practicerelated, professional needs, and goals. We grouped these perceived constraints in parallel to affordance categorization (Table 4) and summarized our ﬁndings for each constraint in Table 5. Table 5 illustrates clinicians’ practice-related goals matched with system limitations, clinicians’ responses to this constraint, and the expected consequences both for the patient at the micro level and the population at the macro level. As shown in Table 5, the clinicians’ responses to the perceived constraints pointed to divergent usage behaviors. Some clinicians adopted limited workarounds and discretionary usage; however, the majority used the systems as mandated, abandoning their practice-related goals.

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines 392 Table 4 FMIS affordances and perceived beneﬁts for care delivery

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

Perceived Affordancea Recording affordance

Clinicians’goal-oriented actions To systematically capture patient and visit data

Enabling FMIS features

Perceived beneﬁts for care delivery

Standardizing affordance

Monitoring affordance

Analysis affordance

Integrating affordance

Controlling affordance

Structured data entry forms and Detailed patient diagnosis, treatment, and templates for patients, diagnosis, prescription data, availability for future use treatment, prescription In the old health centers, we used to enter information in a registry. I was not able to remember the background of the patients. Here we see the patients repeatedly. Each time, I question a different aspect of patient’s background such as family, job and personal background. I take small notes. I have the chance to compare them with the information in the system. It is of great use for our practice. FMP SS To perform all primary A. Workﬂow for Standardized information entry care services via the 1. Patient registration Efﬁcient use of examination time system 2. Clinical examination When diagnosing a patient, I have the 3. Diagnosis opportunity to choose among the diagnoses I 4. Treatment make most frequently. I can search from ﬁlters 5. E-prescription too. For example I prescribe the same 6. Formal report preparation medication for chronic patients such as patients B. Standard data entry forms and with blood pressure. I copy them quickly click– templates for patients, diagnosis, click–click. I can manage them in one minute. treatment, prescription FMP C To systematically monitor Pre-set calendars for Systematic and effective follow-up of priority priority patient care needs appointment scheduling and patients alerts for priority patient follow- Simpliﬁed follow-up process up Avoiding negative performance penalties due to follow-up mistakes The software makes the infant follow-ups very easy. I can review what I have to do. There are warning ﬂashes on the screen, I monitor them daily. It is not difﬁcult at all. BSASM_N2 Categorized patient tabs Longitudinal medical record analysis To scrutinize a patient’s Enhanced decision-making support entire medical record to Filters, queries, reports Now I can follow my patients very closely. I support care delivery have the records of the last 3 years. I can go back and check those records and extract a patient’s medical history. I did not know about patients’ medical histories before. FMP YA Integrated kiosk system with all Enhanced patient trafﬁc management To identify patient FMIS instances at the FMC Systematized physician substitution acceptance rules and When a patient comes s/he enters his/her ID manage patient trafﬁc number in kiosk and his/her name appears on my screen. I call in the patients one by one. I can impose a quota for accepting patients. I can arrange my schedule so as to treat x patients in the mornings and y in the afternoons. The number of patients who take a ticket from the kiosk can be determined accordingly. I regulate and manage the patient trafﬁc. FMP TD To control the service Different user proﬁles for Increased data security and user validation provision of the support physician/nurse/medical A physician can reach all information, but personnel secretary nurses cannot as long as the physician does not want them to. Infant, pregnant, and puerperants screens tabs are visible to them. If I put a password or code, she cannot enter the clinical examination part. FMP M

a

Volkoff and Strong (2013), Strong et al. (2014)

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

393 Table 5 FMIS constraints/micro (practice)- and macro (population)-level consequences

Perceived Constraint
Recording Constraint

Clinicians’practice-related goals
To systematically capture detailed patient and visit data according to professional norms E.g., recording the complete anamneses according to medical practice rules and norms

FMIS limitations
Data entry forms and templates not enabling to capture the whole anamneses according to medical norms

Clinicians’ response Consequences
a. Note taking in text boxes b. Recording as imposed by the MoH c. No system-related workaround or discretionary use No system-related workaround or discretionary use Micro level Loss of crucial medical information about the patient Less-informed or ineffective decision making Macro level Incorrect population-level health statistics Micro level Delayed prescription Redundant work, inefﬁcient patient follow-up at housecalls Macro level Lack of quality care delivery to elderly, bedridden or handicapped patients Micro level Inefﬁcient patient follow-up Less-informed or ineffective decision making Macro level Underserved, not followedup patient groups Distortion of public health with ﬁnancial consequences to the national economy in the long run Micro level Incomplete, disaggregated medical records Problems in longitudinal follow-up and analysis of the patient Macro level Leaving the responsibility for carrying medical records across care levels to the patient Micro level Limited follow-up of the patient across care levels Inability to present medical opinion on the patient to higher care levels Redundant work across systems Loss of patient’s medical information Macro level Inefﬁcient resource allocation along the healthcare chain

Standardizing Constraint

To perform all primary care services in a standardized way via the system E.g., conducting patient examination at housecalls

Internet access not available outside of FMC Laptops not equipped No mobile version of FMIS

Monitoring Constraint

To easily and systematically monitor all patients’ care needs, including the non-priority patients E.g., monitoring chronic diseases such as obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, and allergies

Limited data capture No pre-set alerts, calendars, etc. for non-priority patients and for chronic diseases

a. Note taking in text boxes b. Setting reminders in schedules manually c. Recording as imposed by the MoH’ d. No system-related workaround or discretionary use No system-related workaround or discretionary use

Analysis Constraint

To access and scrutinize a patient’s entire medical history across health outlets and levels to support care delivery E.g., analyzing patient’s medical records holistically, including examination and treatment at different family medicine units

Multiple and separate records for the same patient (as registered patient or visitor) No medical record transfer or portability within and across care levels

Integrating Constraint

To perform all primary care delivery actions using the system E.g., requesting lab tests and retrieving the results via the FMIS, system-driven referral of patients to hospitals

No system support for referral chain No integration across primary care main and peripheral systems

a. Limited note taking when referring the patient to the secondary level b. Recording as imposed by the MoH

FMC Family Medicine Center, FMIS Family Medicine Information System, MoH Ministry of Health

We observed several constraints imposed by the system. First, some physicians reported limitations about the data structure for recording patients’ medical history. They were dissatisﬁed with the extent of anamnesis capture from a medical perspective. Physician EK discussed such limitations:

When I log into a patient’s record I ask routine questions of the patient such as their smoking and drinking habits. I enter smoking info in a package/year format. Are two persons who smoke a pack in 10 years and another who smokes 10 packs a year the same? The format of data entry that the Ministry demands is like this: A patient has smoked/has never

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines 394

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

smoked/has given up smoking/still smokes. I cannot enter info into system in the format I want. We deﬁned this limitation as a recording constraint, which led to the loss of crucial information about the patient and less-informed – or ineffective – decision making. At the macro level, this constraint might cause incorrect population-level statistics. As a response, some physicians took additional notes in text boxes in order to capture the most accurate information; however, the majority of physicians recorded data only as required by the Ministry of Health. Second, clinicians lacked necessary system support when they paid visits to bedridden, elderly, or handicapped patients at their homes. There was no mobile version of the system and e-prescribing was not possible without Internet access. In these instances, clinicians had to use paper-based forms to capture information during house calls. Nurse 2 described this limitation: During house calls the physician leaves her laptop here, she cannot view the data there. We follow up bedridden patients on Wednesdays. We make house calls together with the physician. We used to take the laptop with us. Physicians need to e-prescribe, but there is no room to put the laptop and we need internet to access patient data in the system. There is a paper-based protocol form for house calls. We complete the info when we come back and e-prescribe later. We labeled this limitation as a standardizing constraint, which resulted in redundant work, delayed prescription, and inefﬁcient patient follow-up at the practice level. It also led to the lack of quality care to these patient groups at the macro level. We found no system-related workaround adopted by the clinicians to address this limitation. Third, the system was designed to closely monitor priority patient groups and as a result, it lacked features to follow up with those with chronic diseases such as obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, and allergies. Hence, the system’s design did not fully support the clinicians’ goals for the follow-up and treatment of these patients. This limitation was described by Physician GA: I also need to follow up on diabetes more efﬁciently. I cannot view the medical history of a chronic diabetes patient; I cannot follow up his past values. There is a Diabetes Follow-up section. When I click that button I cannot view this info; it does not indicate blood sugar values for the last 3 months. I cannot always write them down on a piece of paper or the notes section. We labeled this limitation as a monitoring constraint. As a result, at the practice level, patient groups living with chronic diseases were not sufﬁciently monitored and treated according to universal care standards. This caused ineffective medical decisions and adverse health consequences. Some physicians employed limited workarounds to follow up with patients with chronic diseases, such as notetaking in text boxes, or manually creating reminders in their schedules. However, they could not systematically monitor these health indicators. At the macro level, the Ministry of Health’s ﬁght against chronic diseases

struggled because of the lack of system support. We concluded that this deﬁciency in preventive care might lead to distortion of public health with social and ﬁnancial consequences to the nation in the long run. Fourth, the system’s design did not allow access to patient data by any family medicine personnel other than the designated physician. When the designated physician was absent, a substitute physician from the same clinic attended to the patient. Since the substitute physician could not access patient’s existing medical records, the substitute physician was forced to re-register the patient as a visitor. On following visits, the designated physician could not access the patient’s records for their most recent visit because of patient’s visitor status. Similarly, when a highly mobile patient was attended at multiple locations other than at their residence, the visitor status at other locations prohibited access to the patient’s records by the designated physician. This limitation was described by Physician M: [When the physician is absent] the patient has to show the committee health report to my substitute. He comes with a copy of that report; he needs to tell about his condition. The substitute physician cannot see previous health info. If I am the substitute, I ask the nurse, if the situation requires. If an old patient comes and he does not know his medication, I cannot send him to the pharmacy. Then I call the physician’s nurse. If the computer is open she can check the previous medication. Physician M We labeled this limitation as an analysis constraint. At the practice level, separate health records could not be related and aggregated, limiting the capacity for later treatment, follow-up, and analysis. This limitation left the responsibility for the ‘‘off line integration’’ of medical records to the patient. At the macro level, the cardinal tenets of primary care were not met, including longitudinality, comprehensive care, and integrative care. We found no system-related workaround adopted by the clinicians to address this limitation. Last but not least, the FMIS was not integrated with other systems at other primary- and secondary-level healthcare organizations. Physicians could informally refer their patients to the secondary level without system support. Nevertheless, physicians were not able to present their diagnosis and feedback to their peers at other care levels. This limitation was described by Physician TD: I am able to see that this patient has been to a dentist and a cardiologist; but I cannot view what the procedures were. If I click on the patient I can view the medications which the patient got through Social Security and whether s/he has a medical report or not. I cannot view the procedures that have been carried out in the place s/he went. The patient tells me about it when s/he comes back. We labeled the above-mentioned limitation as an integrating constraint. This lack of integration limited the physicians’ ability to follow their patients through the care chain. The integrating constraint also prevented the aggregation of patient medical records collected at different outlets.

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

395

Figure 2 Consequences of Ministry of Health and Clinician Goal Alignment.

Linking Ministry of Health’s population-level goals and clinicians’ practice-related goals As reported above, the FMIS was designed to materialize and fulﬁll the Ministry of Health’s population-level primary care goals. Hence, the system could be described as the carrier of the Ministry’s goals. While describing system usage, the clinicians reported either similar (convergent) or variant (divergent) system usage behaviors. We found that the type of usage behaviors that the clinicians chose to adopt was associated with whether the system enabled or constrained goal achievement through usage. These usage behaviors also depended upon whether the population-level goals of the Ministry of Health and the practice-oriented goals of the clinicians were aligned or misaligned. Figure 2 illustrates the consequences of goal alignment or misalignment in terms of system usage behaviors and responses. In the case of goal alignment between the Ministry of Health and the clinicians, the system design carrying the Ministry goals simultaneously allowed clinicians to achieve their universal practice-related goals. These goals included longitudinal and comprehensive patient care, the systematic capture of medical data, effective analysis and decision making, and efﬁcient care provision. As shown in Figure 2, goal alignment between the Ministry of Health and clinicians led to convergent FMIS usage behavior. When the goals of the two parties were aligned, all clinicians reported the routine usage of the system as designed in the context of patient care delivery. For example, one of the major goals of the Ministry of Health was to decrease infant and childhood mortality through vaccinations. Childhood vaccinations are administered in a recommended schedule at different age ranges early in life – a procedure that is well established in the medical community. The pre-set calendars supported by the FMIS conformed to this standard of care and all clinicians reported using this feature routinely to schedule and monitor care for these patients. The goal-oriented actions described in

Table 4 were reported as routine system usage across all clinicians. Hence, the convergent FMIS usage led to standardized use across clinicians to achieve professional goals. Contrariwise, in the case of goal misalignment, the system design constrained care delivery and achievement of clinicians’ practice-related goals. As a result, goal misalignment caused divergent usage behaviors among clinicians. Some physicians adopted limited discretionary uses, to the extent possible in such an inﬂexible system (see Table 5). For example, when faced with a recording constraint, some physicians took detailed patient notes in text boxes such as patient’s allergies, character, and problems experienced in interactions. Yet, these notes could not be ﬁltered or analyzed systematically afterwards. Similarly, they set reminders and alerts in their schedules manually to support the recommended schedule for following-up with patients with chronic diseases. Our ﬁndings indicated that limited discretionary use was primarily reported by specialized family medicine practitioners, general practitioners involved in research and education, and ‘‘tech-savvy’’ users. The majority of users, primarily the non-specialized general practitioners and family medicine support personnel, did not perform any workarounds. Rather, they accepted the system-enforced way of care delivery. In doing so, the majority of users were unable to serve patients according to the accepted norms of family medicine practice as they were trained to do. As shown in Figure 2, we label this user response to system limitations as goal abandonment. Discussion This research investigates consequences of the usage of a mandatory EHR, in our case the Family Medicine Information System in Turkey, as part of a comprehensive, topdown, ICT-enabled primary care transformation in a developing country. Much of the existing literature on ICT

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines 396

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

implementation in developing countries emphasizes the role of ICTs in achieving macro-level goals as measured by population-level statistics, without investigating the changes at the clinical practice level necessary to achieve these goals. To address this gap, we present a multi-level research framework and shift the focus of analysis to the meso-level structure, speciﬁcally addressing the design and use of the EHR. Drawing on perspectives from Information Systems (IS), ICT for Development (ICT4D), and Health Informatics literatures, and utilizing the affordances concept, we examine how EHR links macro-level goals of a developing country to micro-level usage behaviors, and therefore, how it may shape primary care delivery routines. We identify EHR usage behaviors of clinicians as a response to EHR abilities and limitations and mark the condition under which these behaviors become standard practice. This typically occurred when there was goal alignment between the Ministry of Health and clinicians. In the following paragraphs, we reﬂect on the paper’s implications for theory and practice. We also discuss limitations that may be overcome through future research. Theoretical contributions ICT-enabled transformation: a multi-level research framework The nation-wide transformation of primary care services has substantial consequences for the socio-economic development of a country, measured by various indicators such as maternal and infant mortality, as well as vaccination rates. However, these statistics report population-level consequences of the transformation without explaining the change in care delivery routines, and more importantly, how the change is actualized at the micro level. In other words, micro-level consequences of a macro-level transformation in primary care delivery can hardly be explained by evaluating population-level statistics only. Indeed, the macro-level transformation is operationalized via nationwide implementation of meso-level structures, such as schemes, frameworks, best practices, models, and ICTs. This transformation translates macro-level goals into micro-level actions. In Turkey’s primary care context, the meso-level structures correspond to a rigorously designed organizational context structure, including the family medicine care delivery model, performance evaluation, a pay framework for family medicine personnel, and the embedded EHR system that is designed to fulﬁll macrolevel goals. We posit that to understand the change at the micro level, clinicians’ EHR usage behaviors with regard to primary care delivery and their consequences have to be investigated. Prior research in IS, ICT4D, and Health Informatics has studied the transformational role of ICTs and the implications of ICT implementation in care delivery, particularly that of EHR. However, the above-mentioned linkages between macro, meso, and micro levels are often overlooked in this literature. Our literature review did not uncover studies analyzing the relationship between macro-level goals (such as population-level health statistics), and micro-level behaviors (such as care delivery routines), except in an emerging IS research stream that explores the relationship between objectives and behaviors through system usage ¨ hring, 2014; Jensen et al., (Gosain, 2004; Hultin and Ma

2009). Following this emerging research, we contribute to IS theory by introducing and validating a multi-level research framework that links macro-level goals to micro-level behaviors via meso-level structures that manifests institutional logic. Our study draws attention to the structural dimension of the context that shapes the transformation at both micro and macro levels. Regarding ICT-enabled developmental transformation, our paper contributes to the ICT4D literature by building a theoretical explanation of how ICT-enabled change inﬂuences primary care clinicians’ practice routines and consequently impacts socio-economic development. Our analysis reveals a dual impact with regard to the meso-level EHR; namely, the ICTs may facilitate, as well as constrain, macrolevel transformation. Being the sole designer, engineer, and administrator of the ICT-enabled macro-level transformation, the Ministry of Health reﬂects an undeniable institutional role with particular population-level priorities. On the one hand, its involvement and control over the design, implementation, and use of the system (including the validation of software developers) ensures the routine use of EHR and sustained change in micro-level care delivery routines. Our ﬁndings provide empirical evidence that mandatory EHR usage indeed results in improvements in service provision, such as enhanced access to services, regular and longitudinal follow-up for priority patient groups, electronic accumulation of medical records, as well as in healthcare delivery management, including the strict control over primary care practices and prescribing. On the other hand, the priorities of the Ministry of Health embedded in the meso-level system substantially shape and limit family medicine personnel’s practices, sometimes resulting in variations in care delivery across patient groups. Thus, the same EHR inhibit (or do not facilitate) care delivery to non-priority patient groups, such as bedridden or handicapped patients or those living with chronic diseases. These patients do not receive the same level of service offered to priority patients because their diseases are not systematically recorded and followed up via EHR, nor are their medical records captured with the same rigor as it is done for priority patient groups. As a result, macro-level goals related to public health monitoring are challenged due to the loss of valuable medical data, which cannot be systematically entered into the EHR system. These limitations are not directly reﬂected in the development indicators, but we argue that these implications may lead to adverse consequences on public health in the long run. Thus, our study contributes to the ICT4D, Health Informatics, and IS literature by showing that unintended consequences at the micro level may endanger the initial macro-level success of an ICT-enabled transformation. Without analyzing the ICT-enabled transformation under a multi-level research framework, our analysis would be incomplete and our understanding would be limited. Designer – user goal alignment Another contribution of our study is introduction of the goal alignment concept, between the designer and the users of the system. On the one hand, the designer, namely the Ministry of Health, has macro-level developmental objectives that are reﬂected in the design of the meso-level system. On the other hand, the users, namely the physicians and nurses, have

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

397

professional goals in line with the norms of their medical practice, such as longitudinal and comprehensive patient care, the systematic capture of medical data, effective analysis and decision making, and enhanced care delivery for all patients. Our data suggest that these two sets of goals do not always overlap. While using the EHR, family medicine personnel try to reconcile their professional goals with those of the Ministry, which are embedded in the system design. When the professional and institutional goals are aligned, the material aspects of the IT artifact enable the realization of users’ goaloriented actions; consequently, EHR affordances are actualized. This ﬁnding is in line with the literature (Leonardi, 2011; Strong et al., 2014). In this case, usage behaviors converge across clinicians; they effectively adopt and routinely employ EHR-imposed care delivery. We argue that convergent usage behaviors, which reinforce professional goals, result in increased standardization, efﬁciency, and effectiveness in family medicine services delivery and contribute to improvements in health-related outcomes. On the contrary, when the goals are misaligned, users perceive system features as constraints and show divergent EHR usage behaviors. As exempliﬁed in the ﬁndings section, the physicians’ aim was to record the patients’ anamnesis according to medical norms. However, the Ministry’s data structure did not support this goal. Instead, it was designed to capture only a narrower set of patient data. When faced with this constraint, some physicians attempted to create a limited discretionary workaround, such as taking notes in text boxes despite the fact that these notes could not be ﬁltered or analyzed systematically afterwards. This ﬁnding supports prior research arguing that users reconcile their goals with the materiality of the technology and develop new routines of behaviors or imbrications (Leonardi, 2011). However, the majority did not note patients’ smoking habit or alcohol consumption, which would be a factor in healthrelated decisions. Rather, they used the system only as mandated. We also observed that the physicians were not motivated to make these notes. Hence, we identify this choice as goal abandonment of the users. We argue that the system design and enforced priorities embedded in the meso-level structures may lead users to abandon their practice-related, professional goals, which may adversely affect the achievement of macro-level developmental outcomes. The ICT4D and IS literature is silent on the implications of goal alignment or misalignment between stakeholders of ICT-enabled transformation. Thus, we contribute to the literature by underscoring the importance of the goal alignment concept and its adverse macro-level consequences in the case of misalignment. Furthermore, prior IS studies about affordances have investigated behaviors of a particular set of users who have signiﬁcant expertise and authority within the organization and can marshal resources to support technical change (Leonardi, 2011; Volkoff and Strong, 2013). Our results show that this is not the case in all settings, especially in a nationwide, top-down, mandatory ICT implementation for public services transformation. Some user proﬁles that have expertise or interest in technology, or a specialization in the subject matter, can indeed adapt their routines, yet are limited in their adoption of the technology. In our example, physicians who specialized in family medicine, or were involved in

clinical research, or who were tech savvy responded to EHR constraints with minor discretionary usage behavior. Accordingly, our study highlights the inﬂuence of users’ background in responses to system limitations. Practical and policy implications Our research has implications for the policy makers of the developing countries, especially those who are interested in implementing nation-wide information systems, such as EHR, to support primary care services. First, we acknowledge that an inﬂexible information system and greater centralized control might be critical for the success of nation-wide transformation of healthcare delivery in a developing country, especially at the initial stages. An important aspect of development is governance quality in terms of efﬁciency, transparency, and accountability (Avgerou, 2010). A sociotechnical system designed to facilitate centralized control helps the government to supervise and achieve these important goals. However, our results show that other stakeholders, namely the family medicine personnel especially the physicians, have professional and practice-related goals that are beyond the efﬁciency gains. For example, the capturing anamnesis details according to medical norms, risk-based patient health analysis and treatment, and the analysis of aggregated medical records captured through care levels and outlets, are all important requirements for physicians to provide quality service in line with medical standards. When the systems are not designed to fulﬁll the requirements of both the designer and the users, goal misalignment manifests in system constraints and, as shown in our ﬁndings, may result in user goal abandonment. In the healthcare context, this situation is likely to have negative effects in the long run for the entire population, and particularly for some underserved patient groups. Therefore, ICTs should be designed to ensure goal alignment to the utmost extent for all stakeholders, especially care providers. Physician EK aptly summarized how an appropriately designed EHR could support his ability to provide enhanced healthcare for all patients. I would like to be able to schedule patient’s visits and to be reminded by the system. I would like to notify the patient, if he doesn’t show up, we will call him. But, for example, I have a patient, he has diabetes and he must perform his own follow-up. If only we could really apply family medicine as accepted universally, I would practice better Second, our results inform the designers and the project managers responsible for the nation-wide implementation of ICTs and who support public services in a developing country. Developing countries are known for variations in access levels to public services, which might be caused by the demographics of the population among other reasons. One of these demographic characteristics is the level of mobility of the citizens. A higher level of mobility means that citizens need to receive primary care services at multiple places; hence, their medical history has to be aggregated across care levels and outlets. Health-related ICTs that are designed without considering the requirements of different demographics might not fully support the achievement of macrolevel development goals. It is also possible that they might

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines 398

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

cause redundant or inefﬁcient routines with regard to care delivery. For example, if a highly mobile patient is served at multiple health outlets and their medical records captured at different outlets are not aggregated, the patient’s health may not be tracked longitudinally or efﬁciently. As a result, clinicians may make uninformed medical decisions about patient’s health due to inaccessible indicators. Finally, our results emphasize the need for educating clinicians to ensure the effective capture and management of health information. Mandating system usage for care delivery is a necessity to ensure the nation-wide adoption of the ICTs and the standardization of service provision. However, our study shows that it is not sufﬁcient. Clinicians are indeed trained on how to use the system, but they are not continuously educated about the role of the systems in medical practice or, more importantly, about their role in systematized information gathering and analysis. Our ﬁndings suggest that discretionary use in order to compensate system constraints is exerted by a particular user proﬁle, namely specialized family medicine physicians; the physicians who are involved either in clinical research or in education, or those having an interest in technology. This type of user values patient information and understands the clinician’s role in health information management and patient treatment. Hence, these users adopt a relevant usage style. Contrarily, the majority of clinicians use the system as a tool for efﬁciency gains only, or in other words, to fulﬁll the Ministry of Health’s requirements. We suggest that policy makers continuously educate health care personnel about the importance of system-driven information management to ensure sustainable success in ICT implementation for development. Limitations and future research We acknowledge limitations of our research. First, our empirical study is based on a relatively small sample, limiting the potential for generalizing based on these results. Nevertheless, our aim is to explore the phenomenon and contribute to theory development rather than generalization and theory testing. In addition, we limited our sample to only family medicine practitioners serving in Istanbul’s metropolitan area to control for economic, social, and cultural contexts. This choice necessarily limits the interpretation of results relating to low socio-economic neighborhoods in the metropolitan area, which accept high levels of immigration from rural areas of the whole country. Future research could compare usage behaviors across different socio-economic settings, such as mid-level and high-level socio-economic neighborhoods, or compare similar socio-economic settings across different geographic regions of a developing country. Second, by design, this study is cross-sectional, not longitudinal. Hence, we could not observe changes in system use over time, and in turn, the implications of those changes. A longitudinal study would provide deeper insights into the emergence of system usage behaviors, as well as the perceived constraints and their consequences for system usage. Third, there are some limitations associated with our data collection method. Semi-structured interviews are the substantial source of our micro-level analysis. The literature posits that this kind of interviews might produce biases due to social desirability, anxiety, feelings of intrusion, and hesitation on the part of interviewees (Patton, 2002; Myers and Newman,

2007). Because of the nature of our research topic and professional characteristics of the interviewees, we argue that these distorting factors do not prevail in our empirical study. Nevertheless, we attempted to address these concerns through the interview protocol with open-ended questions and ensuring privacy of participants when conducting interviews. Moreover, interviews were conducted in the participants’ native language. By conducting the interviews in Turkish, we minimized challenges to participant self-expression. Our data collection was also limited due to our inability to observe actual system usage; thus, we primarily relied on the respondents’ reports due to privacy and conﬁdentiality concerns. To overcome this limitation, we supplemented observations with reviews of the FMIS tutorials. Finally, our research primarily reﬂects the family medicine personnel’s perspective. Although we tried to gain the perspective of the government through publicly available strategy and policy papers and reports, we were not able to interview Ministry of Health representatives. Future research could focus on reﬂecting the institutional perspective in order to better understand goal alignment. In addition, we acknowledge the need for collecting data from patients to understand the implications of EHR implementation for perceived quality of service. As a novel ﬁnding, the concept of goal alignment, particularly goal abandonment, emerged in our study. We think that this construct deserves further analysis and validation. IS scholars might further investigate this construct – its dimensions, antecedents, and implications – by developing and validating scales, as well as testing hypotheses in various system settings. The implications of goal abandonment and divergent system usage behaviors on macro-level goals and overall developmental transformation call for further analysis.

Conclusion There is widespread consensus that ICT investments can enhance healthcare management capabilities and support provisioning of healthcare services in developing countries. In this research, we present a multi-level analysis of an EHR implementation in the context of nation-wide healthcare transformation in Turkey. Our ﬁndings indicate that system usage both enables and constrains the achievement of clinicians’ professional goals in the context of primary care delivery. We also highlight the importance of the meso-level structures, including EHR, in linking population-level healthcare goals with micro-level clinician usage behaviors that actualize macro-level goals or alternatively lead to unintended negative consequences. Furthermore, we introduce two new concepts, namely goal alignment between the system designer and the users who deliver care services, as well as goal abandonment by clinicians as a response to system constraints. These limitations have implications for clinicians’ system usage behaviors and ultimately care delivery. Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers, the Senior Editor and the Special Issue Editors for feedback and comments that helped

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

399

us substantially to improve the manuscript. We also express our sincere appreciation to the family medicine personnel who generously gave their time to participate in this research.

Notes
1 Source: http://ailehekimligi.gov.tr/. 2 E.g., Law #5258 on Family Medicine, bylaws on Application of Family Medicine Services, House calls, Training for the Caregivers, Work schedules. 3 Source: http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/haber/saglik/513447/ Saglikta_yeni_taslak__Sevk_almadan_hastane_yok.html.

References
Aile Hekimligi. [WWW document]. (2016). http://ailehekimligi.gov.tr/ [accessed 13th January 2016]. Akdag, R. (2009). Progress Report Health Transformation Programme. Ankara: Ministry of Health of Turkey. Atun, R. (2015). Transforming Turkey’s Health System—Lessons for Universal Coverage, New England Journal of Medicine 373(14): 1285–1289. Avgerou, C. (2010). Discourses on ICT and Development, Information Technologies & International Development 6(3): 1–18. Blaya, J.A., Fraser, H.S. and Holt, B. (2010). E-health Technologies Show Promise in Developing Countries, Health Affairs 29(2): 244–251. Bodvala, R. (2002). ICT Applications in Public Healthcare System in India: A Review, ASCI Journal of Management 31(1): 56–66. Braa, J., Monteiro, E. and Sahay, S. (2004). Networks of Action: Sustainable Health Information Systems Across Developing Countries, MIS Quarterly 28(3): 337–362. Cayhan, B.E. (2008). Implementing E-Government in Turkey: A Comparison of Online Public Service Delivery in Turkey and the European Union, The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries 35(8): 1–11. Chaudhry, B., Wang, J., Wu, S., Maglione, M., Mojica, W., Roth, E., et al. (2006). Systematic Review: Impact of Health Information Technology on Quality, Efﬁciency, and Costs of Medical care, Annals of Internal Medicine 144(10): 742–752. Clifford, G.D., Blaya, J.A., Hall-Clifford, R. and Fraser, H.S. (2008). Medical Information systems: A Foundation for Healthcare Technologies in Developing Countries, BioMedical Engineering OnLine 7(1): 18–25. De Maeseneer, J., Van Weel, C., Egilman, D., Mfenyana, K., Kaufman, A., Sewankambo, N., et al. (2008). Funding for Primary Health Care in Developing Countries, British Medical Journal 336(7643): 518–519. Fayard, A.L. and Weeks, J. (2014). Affordances for Practice, Information and Organization 24(4): 236–249. Fraser, H.S.F., Biondich, P., Moodley, D., Choi, S., Wamlin, B.W. and Szolovits, P. (2005). Implementing Electronic Medical Record Systems in Developing Countries, Informatics in Primary Care 13, 83–95. Freedman, L.P., Waldman, R.J., de Pinho, H., Wirth, M.E., Chowdhury, A.M.R. and Rosenﬁeld, A. (2005). Transforming Health Systems to Improve the Lives of Women and Children, The Lancet 365(9463): 997–1000. Gibson, J.J. (1986): The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Gosain, S. (2004). Enterprise Information Systems As Objects and Carriers of Institutional Forces: The New Iron Cage? Journal of the Association for Information Systems 5(4): 151–182. Heeks, R. (2003): Most e-Government for Development Projects Fail: How Can Risks Be Reduced?, In iGovernment Working Paper Series, Paper No. 14 Manchester, UK: Institute for Development Policy and Management, University of Manchester. Heeks, R. (2006). Health Information Systems: Failure, Success and Improvisation, International Journal of Medical Informatics 75(2): 125–137. ¨ hring, M. (2014). Visualizing Institutional Logics in Hultin, L. and Ma Sociomaterial Practices, Information and Organization 24(3): 129–155.

Hutchby, I. (2001). Technologies, Texts and Affordances, Sociology 35(2): 441–456. Jensen, T.B., Kjærgaard, A. and Svejvig, P. (2009). Using Institutional Theory with Sensemaking Theory: A Case Study of Information System Implementation in Healthcare, Journal of Information Technology 24(4): 343–353. Kaplan, E. (2016). Saglikta Yeni Taslak: Sevk Almadan Hastane Yok, Cumhuriyet retrieved from http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr. Kekki, P. (2004): Primary Health Care and the Millennium Development Goals: Issues for Discussion, Geneva: WHO. Kimaro, H. and Nhampossa, J. (2007). The Challenges of Sustainability of Health Information Systems in Developing Countries: Comparative Case Studies of Mozambique and Tanzania, Journal of Health Informatics in Developing Countries 1(1): 1–10. Kimaro, H.C. and Sahay, S. (2007). An Institutional Perspective on the Process of Decentralization of Health Information Systems: A Case Study from Tanzania, Information Technology for Development 13(4): 363–390. Leonardi, P.M. (2011). When Flexible Routines Meet Flexible Technologies: Affordance, Constraint, and the Imbrication of Human and Material Agencies, MIS Quarterly 35(1): 147–167. Leonardi, P.M. and Barley, S.R. (2008). Materiality and Change: Challenges to Building Better Theory About Technology and Organizing, Information and Organization 18(3): 159–176. Luna, D., Almerares, A., Mayan, J.C., Bernaldo, Gonzalez, de Quiros, F. and Otero, C. (2014). Health Informatics in Developing Countries: Going Beyond Pilot Practices To Sustainable Implementations: A Review of the Current Challenges, Healthcare Informatics Research 20(1): 3–10. Luna, D., Otero, C. and Marcelo, A. (2013). Health Informatics in Developing Countries: Systematic Review of Reviews, Yearb Med Inform 28, 33–38. Lungo, J.H. and Igira, F. (2008). Development of Health Information System in Zanzibar: Practical Implications, Journal of Health Informatics in Developing Countries 2(1): 24–32. Madon, S., Sahay, S. and Sudan, R. (2007). E-Government Policy and Health Information Systems Implementation in Andhra Pradesh, India: Need For Articulation of Linkages Between the Macro and the Micro, The Information Society 23: 327–344. Miles, M.B. and Huberman, A.M. (1994). Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook (2nd ed.), Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Miller, R.H. and Sim, I. (2004). Physicians’ Use Of Electronic Medical Records: Barriers and Solutions, Health Affairs 23(2): 116–126. Ministry of Health of Turkey. (2012). Turkey Health Transformation Program, Assessment Report (2003–2011), Ankara: Ministry of Health of Turkey. Myers, M.D. and Newman, M. (2007). The Qualitative Interview in IS Research: Examining the Craft, Information and Organization 17(1): 2–26. ¨ zdemir, R. (2014). Family Medicine Ocek, Z.A., Ciceklioglu, M., Yucel, U. and O Model in Turkey: A Qualitative Assessment from the Perspectives of Primary Care Workers, BMC Family Practice 15(1): 1–15. OECD. (2010). Improving Health Sector Efﬁciency: The Role of Information and Communication Technologies. Orlikowski, W.J. (2000). Using Technology and Constituting Structures: A Practice Lens for Studying Technology in Organizations, Organization Science 11(4): 404–428. Patton, M.Q. (2002). Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods (3rd ed.), Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Petrakaki, D., Klecun, E. and Cornford, T. (2014). Changes in Healthcare Professional Work Afforded By Technology: The Introduction of a National Electronic Patient Record in an English Hospital, Organization 23(2): 206–226. Saglik.net. [WWW document] http://www.e-saglik.gov.tr/ [accessed 13th January 2016]. Sahin, I., Ozcan, Y.A. and Ozgen, H. (2011). Assessment of Hospital Efﬁciency Under Health Transformation Program in Turkey, Central European Journal of Operations Research 19, 19–37. Stoffregen, T.A. (2003). Affordances As Properties of the Animal-Environment System, Ecological Psychology 15(2): 115–134. Strong, D.M., Volkoff, O., Johnson, S.A., Pelletier, L.R., Tulu, B., Bar-On, I., et al. (2014). A Theory of Organization-EHR Affordance Actualization, Journal of the Association for Information Systems 15(2): 53–85. Tatar, M. and Kanavos, P. (2006). Health Care Reform in Turkey, EurohealthLondon 12(1): 20–22. ˘ lu, S., Sahin, B., Aydın, S., Maresso, A. and HernandezTatar, N., Mollahalilog Quevedo, C. (2011). Turkey: Health System Review, Health Systems in Transition 13(6): 1–186.

Linking macro-level goals to micro-level routines 400

M. Findikoglu and M. B. Watson-Manheim

Turan, A.H. and Palvia, P.C. (2014). Critical Information Technology Issues in Turkish Healthcare, Information & Management 51: 57–68. Turkiye Sinai Kalkinma Bankasi. (2014). Saglik Sektoru Raporu, Ankara: TSKB. Unger, J.P., Dormael, M.V., Criel, B., Vennet, J.V.D. and Munck, P.D. (2002). A Plea for an Initiative To Strengthen Family Medicine in Public Health Care Services of Developing Countries, International Journal of Health Services 32(4): 799–815. Volkoff, O. and Strong, D.M. (2013). Critical Realism and Affordances: Theorizing IT-associated Organizational Change Processes, MIS Quarterly 37(3): 819–834. Weber, R. (2012). Evaluating and Developing Theories in the Information Systems Discipline, Journal of the Association for Information Systems 13(1): 1–30. Williams, F. and Boren, S.A. (2008). The Role of the Electronic Medical Record (EMR) in Care Delivery Development in Developing Countries: A Systematic Review, Informatics in Primary Care 16(2): 139–145. World Bank, Human Development Sector Unit, Europe and Central Asia Region. (2013). Turkey Performance-Based Contracting Scheme in Family Medicine–Design and Achievements Report No: 77029. Yasar, G. (2011). Review ‘Health Transformation Programme’ in Turkey: An Assessment, International Journal of Health Planning Management 26: 110–133. Zammuto, R.F., Grifﬁth, T.L., Majchrzak, A., Dougherty, D.J. and Faraj, S. (2007). Information Technology and the Changing Fabric of Organization, Organization Science 18(5): 749–762.

About the Authors Melike Findikoglu is an Assistant Professor at Ozyegin University, Faculty of Business in the Management Information Systems department. She earned her PhD in Management Information Systems at the University of Illinois, Chicago. Her main interests concern ICT-enabled change in developing countries and organizations, technology partnerships, and value creation. Mary Beth Watson-Manheim is a Professor of Information Systems in the Information Decision Sciences Department and the Communication Department at the University of Illinois, Chicago. She is actively involved in research on the managerial and social implications of a global and ICTintensive workplace as well as ICT-based innovations in health care.

