Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 73–74

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Strategic Information Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jsis

Editorial
Welcome to the second issue of Volume 25 of the Journal of Strategic Information Systems. Continuing our long-standing tradition of publishing articles that deal with key strategic issues in the ﬁeld of Information Systems from an international perspective, in this issue of JSIS we include four articles written by colleagues from Denmark, France, Germany and the United States. The two themes that are our focus in this issue are, ﬁrst, that of strategic alignment, and second, the strategic impacts and management of social media use in organizations. The question of alignment (or aligning) has been the subject of many research studies over the past twenty years or more (e.g., Chan and Reich, 2007; Henderson and Venkatraman, 1993; Karpovsky and Galliers, 2015), and indeed, was ﬁrst discussed in this journal back in its very ﬁrst volume (Baets, 1992), and on many other occasions subsequently (most recently, e.g., Baker and Niederman, 2014; Boonstra et al., 2011; Jaegersberg and Ure, 2011). Strategic issues associated with the burgeoning use of social media within and between organizations is a more recent topic of course, but nonetheless have received a great deal of attention in this journal since the turn of the millennium (e.g., Jarvenpaa and Staples, 2000) and elsewhere – and from a variety of perspectives (e.g., Huang et al., 2013; Kaplan and Haenlein, 2010; Romero et al., 2011) – and also recently in JSIS (e.g., Ali-Hassan et al., 2015; Gerlach et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2015; von Krogh, 2012). Thus, our ﬁrst article in this issue of JSIS is by Alexandre Renaud (ESSCA School of Management, France), Isabelle Walsh (SKEMA Business School, France) and Michel Kalika (IAE Lyon, France). Titled ‘‘Is SAM still alive? A bibliometric and interpretive mapping of the strategic alignment research ﬁeld”, the authors reconsider Henderson and Venkatraman’s (1993) Strategic Alignment Model (SAM), noting the ‘‘signiﬁcant disparity between the intended contribution of the literature built around SAM and the apparent practical consequences of its application in organizations”. Taking a grounded theory stance combined with a bibliometric and interpretive approach they analyze the extant literature on the topic. They conclude that the research based on SAM appears, for the most part at least, not ‘‘to challenge its basic assumptions and premises, although these may artiﬁcially constrain organizational reality and practices”. This leads the authors to ‘‘propose an explanation for practitioners’ apparent failures to fulﬁll SAM’s intended contribution”. The article concludes with potential theoretical and practical adaptations to the model in light of current organizational realities. Our second article in this issue of JSIS is titled, ‘‘Does mutuality matter? Examining the bilateral nature and effects of CEO–CIO mutual understanding” and is by Alexander Benlian and Ingmar Haffke (Darmstadt University of Technology, Germany). Here, the authors consider the question of alignment in terms of the CEO–CIO relationship, as the title of the article suggests1. It is intuitively obvious that there should be ‘‘a healthy partnership between CEOs and CIOs in organizations for effective business–IT alignment”, as the authors attest. Having said that, the topic remains under-researched and thus Benlian and Haffke consider ‘‘facets of mutual understanding between CEOs and CIOs and how their ability of mutual perspective-taking affects the quality of [their] collaboration”. The authors draw on the perceptual congruence model (PCM) and the actor– partner interdependence model (APIM)2, taken from social and personal relationship research, and examine over 100 matched-pair survey responses of CEOs and CIOs using dyadic data analysis. Their ﬁndings are perhaps surprising in that they indicate that ‘‘executives’ actual opinions on important business and IT topics are more similar than both perceive them to be. Accordingly, perceptions of each other’s opinions are negatively biased away from their real opinions.” Additionally, they conclude that ‘‘CIOs’ understanding of their CEO plays a more pivotal role in predicting the quality of CEO–CIO collaboration than CEOs’ understanding of their CIO” and they draw insights for both research and practice as a result. Turning now to social media management strategy, our third article in this issue of JSIS is by Janek Benthaus and Marten Risius (Goethe University, Germany) and Roman Beck (IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark). Titled, ‘‘ Social media management strategies for organizational impression management and their effect on public perception”, the authors
1 2

Different perspectives have been taken on the issue of ‘‘alignment” over the years, and the concept is questioned as a result in Galliers (2006). See White (1985) and Kenny (1996) respectively.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2016.05.003 0963-8687/Ó 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V.

74

Editorial / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 73–74

‘‘evaluate how social media management tools, as part of an overarching social media strategy, help companies to positively inﬂuence . . . public perception among social media users”. Taking a mixed methods approach they analyzed ‘‘15 million user-generated Twitter messages containing information about 45 large global companies highly active on Twitter [and] almost 160 thousand corresponding messages sent from these companies via their corporate Twitter accounts”. In addition to this, they conducted interviews with six social media experts with a view to gaining further, complementary insights. As a result of their analyses, Benthaus and colleagues were able ‘‘to identify signiﬁcant differences between different social media management strategies and measure the corresponding effects on the public perception”. Their ﬁndings have practical importance, for example, in proposing means by which organizations can collect and analyze Twitter data in order to monitor public perceptions, thereby enabling them to ‘‘track the development of users’ loyalty, the sentiment of . . . public discussion and [those] topics” being discussed via social media. Our ﬁnal article in this issue of JSIS is titled, ‘‘Social media network behavior: A study of user passion and affect”, and is authored by Robin Wakeﬁeld and Kirk Wakeﬁeld of Baylor University, USA. The authors introduce their paper by making the point that social media technologies are perceived ‘‘as an ensemble IS artefact composed of technical, informational and relational subsystems that interact distinctly according to the context of use”. Focusing on these dimensions, they build a conceptual framework ‘‘to examine the inﬂuence of user affect and passion for an activity on social media networks, speciﬁcally Facebook and Twitter”. Their model is based on Affective Events Theory (Weiss and Cropanzano, 1996) and is tested using the responses of over three hundred attendees of a NASCAR3 event. The results of their study indicate that while ‘‘excitement may not be sufﬁcient to motivate content creation and sharing activities in social media . . . in the context of a meaningful event, excitement interacts with user passion to facilitate social media use”. Thus, a practical implication of their ﬁndings is that ‘‘user (or customer) passion is a condition favorable for social media engagement, representing a lucrative opportunity for organizations to meaningfully engage with consumers”. Once again, we hope that the articles published in this issue of JSIS demonstrate the journal’s continued interest in abiding and emerging topics of major theoretical and practical concern in the general area of strategic information systems research. As always, we welcome your reactions and comments. References
Ali-Hassan, H., Nevo, D., Wade, M., 2015. Linking dimensions of social media use to job performance: the role of social capital. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 24 (2), 65–89. Baker, E.W., Niederman, F., 2014. Integrating the IS functions after mergers and acquisitions: analyzing business-IT alignment. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 23 (2), 12–127. Baets, W., 1992. Aligning information systems with business strategy. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 1 (4), 205–213. Boonstra, A., Broekhuis, M., van Offenbeek, M., Wortmann, H., 2011. Strategic alternatives in telecare design: developing a value-conﬁguration-based alignment framework. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 20 (2), 198–214. Chan, Y.E., Reich, B.H., 2007. IT alignment: what have we learned? J. Inf. Technol. 22, 297–315. Galliers, R.D., 2006. On confronting some of the common myths of Information Systems strategy discourse. In: Mansell, R., Avgerou, C., Quah, D., Silverstone, R. (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Information and Communication Technologies. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 225–243. Gerlach, J., Widjaja, T., Buxmann, P., 2015. Handle with care: how online social network providers’ privacy policies impact users’ information sharing behavior. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 24 (1), 33–43. Henderson, J.C., Venkatraman, N., 1993. Strategic alignment: leveraging information technology for transforming organizations. IBM Syst. J. 32 (1), 4–16. Huang, J., Baptista, J., Galliers, R.D., 2013. Reconceptualizing rhetorical practices in organizations: the impact of social media on internal communications. Inf. Manage. 50 (2–3), 112–124. Huang, J., Newell, S., Baptista, J., 2015. Communicational ambidexterity as a new capability to manage social media communication within organizations. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 24 (2), 49–64. Jaegersberg, G., Ure, J., 2011. Barriers to knowledge sharing and stakeholder alignment in solar energy clusters: learning from other sectors and regions. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 20 (4), 343–354. Jarvenpaa, S.L., Staples, S., 2000. The use of collaborative electronic media for information sharing: an exploratory study of determinants. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 9 (2–3), 129–154. Kaplan, A.M., Haenlein, M., 2010. Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of Social Media. Bus. Horiz. 53 (1), 59–68. Karpovsky, A., Galliers, R.D., 2015. Aligning in practice: from current cases to a new agenda. J. Inf. Technol. 30, 136–160. Kenny, D.A., 1996. Models of non-independence in dyadic research. J. Soc. Personal Relatsh. 13 (2), 279–294. Romero, D.M., Galuba, W., Asur, S., Huberman, B.A., 2011. Inﬂuence and Passivity in Social Media. Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, vol. 6913. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 18–33. von Krogh, G., 2012. How does social software change knowledge management? Toward a strategic research agenda. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 21 (2), 154–164. Weiss, H., Cropanzano, R., 1996. Affective events theory: a theoretical discussion of the structure, causes and consequences of affective experiences at work. Res. Organ. Behav. 18 (1), 1–74. White, J., 1985. Perceived similarity and understanding in married couples. J. Soc. Personal Relatsh. 2 (1), 45–57.

With best wishes Bob Galliers Bentley University, USA Loughborough University, UK Sirkka Jarvenpaa The University of Texas at Austin, USA

3 The National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing is a family-owned and operated business venture that sanctions and governs multiple auto-racing sports events. www.nascar.com.

