Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 241–242

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Strategic Information Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jsis

Editorial
Welcome to the ﬁnal issue of Volume 25 of the Journal of Strategic Information Systems. First, we are pleased to note that the two-year Impact Factor1 for JSIS has recently been announced, and now stands at 2.595, ranking the journal 9th out of the 86 Information Science and Library Science journals, and 15th out of 142 Computer Science, Information Systems journals. JSIS has also appeared in the Management journal Impact Factor rankings for the past two years and currently stands at 38th out of 191 journals. Only four Information Systems (IS) journals appear in the top 40 Management journals. JSIS’s two-year Impact Factor (IF) has remained fairly constant over the past three years (i.e., 2.692 in 2015 and 2.571 in 2014), and our three-year mean IF of 2.619 places JSIS 3rd amongst the eight AIS senior scholars’ ‘‘basket” of top IS journals2 over that period. The ﬁve-year Impact Factor is 3.486 and this has been steadily rising in recent years. These data attest to the high standing of the journal and are testament to the quality of the papers being submitted and published, and the attendant reviewing process. We shall acknowledge the excellent work of our reviewers in a subsequent issue. Turning now to the current issue of the journal, we have four research papers dealing with key strategic issues: knowledge creation, business analytics, IT employee turnover, and innovation in the public sector. Our authors once again demonstrate the international orientation of JSIS, hailing from institutions located in Austria, Canada, France, Singapore, South Africa and the United States. The ﬁrst article in this issue of JSIS is by Andreas Kaschig, Ronald Maier and Alexander Sandow from the University of Innsbruck, Austria. It deals with aspects of knowledge creation in organizations. Titled, ‘‘The effects of collecting and connecting activities on knowledge creation in organizations”, the authors make the point that, with the emergence of social software, the emphasis of knowledge work support has shifted from ‘‘collecting manifestations of knowledge to connecting people”. They go on to note that, while this relatively new technology has increased connectivity, there is a current lack of evidence on its effects on knowledge creation. Others have discussed the increased use of social software in organizations, for example in strategy formation (e.g., Huang et al., 2013; Baptista et al., forthcoming), but the implications for knowledge creation – as opposed to knowledge management – remain largely unknown. Building on the concept of knowledge activities and theories of organizational knowledge creation, the paper investigates ‘‘how organizational and IT mechanisms that support collecting and connecting activities affect knowledge creation”. Evidence from a stratiﬁed sample of 126 European organizations is used to provide two contributions to explain knowledge creation in organizations. First, the authors ‘‘empirically validate the claim that individual knowledge creation is a prerequisite of collective knowledge creation”. Second, they provide a distinction between support for collecting and connecting activities, arguing that the link between organizational and IT mechanisms should be seen as an input while knowledge creation is an output. They conclude by arguing that organizations can help to promote knowledge creation by developing a strategy that combines support for collecting and connecting activities by designing mechanisms for collecting activities targeted at individuals together with mechanisms for connecting activities targeted at individuals and groups. Our second paper is titled ‘‘Do shareholders favor business analytics announcements?” and is authored by Thompson Teo (National University of Singapore), Rohit Nishant (ESC Rennes School of Business, France), and Pauline Koh (Shell Chemicals Seraya Pte Ltd., Singapore). Using similar argumentation as the authors of our ﬁrst paper, the authors note that, ‘‘Despite the growing acceptance of business analytics (BA) as a tool for making smarter business decisions, past research has rarely investigated shareholder reactions to BA announcements”. Using signaling theory and resource-based theory (RBT) to analyze their data, they show that ‘‘BA announcements generate positive abnormal returns, thereby providing empirical evidence that shareholders view BA as beneﬁcial”. Their ﬁndings also suggest that characteristics that are more salient to
1 2

Ó Journal Citation Reports 2016, Published by Thomson Reuters. http://aisnet.org/?page=SeniorScholarBasket&hhSearchTerms=%22senior+and+scholars+and+basket%22.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2016.11.001 0963-8687/Ó 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V.

242

Editorial / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 241–242

shareholders are rewarded in that ‘‘ﬁrms implementing BA systems from market-leading vendors obtain more positive stock market reactions compared with other ﬁrms”. Additionally, they ﬁnd that announcements provide greater beneﬁt to ‘‘overbought stocks than oversold stocks, and generate higher positive return in ﬁrms with high sales growth and high return on assets (ROA)”. Further, the empirical evidence they provide leads to the conclusion that signaling theory out-performs RBT in this instance.3 The third article in this issue of JSIS is by Rennie Naidoo, University of Pretoria, South Africa and is titled ‘‘A communicative-tension model of change-induced collective voluntary turnover in IT”. Arguing that talented IT employees are ‘‘the most critical strategic resource in IT”, the author notes that losing this strategic resource during a major organizational change ‘‘can be catastrophic” in terms of overall performance. The article develops a ‘‘multi-layered communicative-tension model of change-induced collective voluntary turnover” as a result of historical case study analysis. Speciﬁcally, the study of a major organizational change that took place in a healthcare insurance ﬁrm’s IT unit ‘‘reveals the presence of three primary communicative tensions: alignment-autonomy, stabilitychange and expression-suppression”. Dissatisﬁed with the negative communicative practices employed by managers in the midst of these communicative tensions, a group of IT employees left the organization. The model developed in this paper complements and extends prior collective voluntary turnover research ‘‘by accounting for the organizational change context and broader relational dynamics”. More generally, it adds to the corpus of research on IT human resource management that JSIS has already published (e.g., Grant and Newell, 2013). Additionally, important insights are provided to practitioners as to how they might manage communicative tensions during IS organizational change, with a view to improving IT talent retention. The ﬁnal paper in this issue of JSIS is titled ‘‘Governing innovation in U.S. state government: An ecosystem perspective”. Authored by Gregory Dawson and Kevin Desouza of Arizona State University, USA and James Denford of the Royal Military College of Canada, the paper makes the point that the common practice of hiring a successful private sector CIO into the public sector in search of IT-based innovation, hoping that their prior experience will transfer, ‘‘often ignores the existence and inﬂuence of other entities and IT governance structures that form the innovation ecosystem”. The authors apply ‘‘the legal view of agency theory” and use a crisp-set Qualitative Comparative Analysis (csQCA) approach to investigate factors that are associated with IT-based innovation in U.S. state government. They ﬁnd that ‘‘CIO characteristics, structural oversight mechanisms, CIO relationships with authorities, and the state environment combine to form conﬁgurations that lead to both high and low performance”. The paper adds to our knowledge of strategic IT issues in the public sector previously considered in the journal (see, for example, Hackney et al., 2008). We trust that you welcome these contributions to the strategic IS literature and look forward to your continued support of JSIS. As always, we welcome your reaction and comment. References
Baptista, J., Wilson, A., Galliers, R.D., Bynghall, S., ptista et al., forthcoming. Social media and the emergence of reﬂexiveness as a new capability for open strategy. Long Range Plan. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.2016.07.005 (forthcoming). Grant, D., Newell, S., 2013. Realizing the strategic potential of e-HRM. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 22 (3), 187–219. Hackney, R., Desouza, K.C., Chau, P., 2008. eGovernment strategies: ICT innovation in international public sector contexts. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 17 (2), 73–74. Huang, J., Baptista, J., Galliers, R.D., 2013. Reconceptualizing rhetorical practices in organizations: the impact of social media on internal communications. Inf. Manage. 50 (2-3), 112–124. Seddon, P.B., 2014. Implications for strategic IS research of the resource-based theory of the ﬁrm: a reﬂection. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 23 (4), 257–269.

With best wishes R.D. Galliers Bentley University, USA Loughborough University, UK Sirkka L. Jarvenpaa The University of Texas at Austin, USA

3

For a reﬂection on RBT in strategic IS research, see Seddon (2014).

