Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 1–3

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Strategic Information Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jsis

Editorial

Welcome to the ﬁrst issue of The Journal of Strategic Information Systems for 2016 – our 25th year. First, it is with sadness that we have to announce that Claudia Loebeckke has stepped down as one of our Senior Editors as of 31st December, 2015. Claudia has served in this capacity since 2004 and has been a wonderful colleague on the senior editorial team for over a decade. Claudia is a sad loss, not just for the advice provided to those authors who have submitted papers to the journal whose reviews she has overseen, but also for raising JSIS’s visibility on the Continent of Europe and beyond. Having said that, we are delighted that she will be retaining her involvement with JSIS as an Honorary Editorial Board Member. Thank you Claudia for all that you have done for the journal over the years. On a happier note, we are also very pleased to announce that Hock Hai Teo from the National University of Singapore has joined us as one of our Senior Editors as of 1st January, 2016. Hock Hai brings with him a wealth of editorial experience and replaces Christina Soh, who also had to leave the senior editorial team at the end of the year. As mentioned in an earlier editorial, Christina has also joined the Honorary Editorial Board team, and thus maintains her close relationship with the journal. Also on a happy note, we want to acknowledge our wonderful reviewers who have helped us so ably this past year. Over 160 colleagues from 20 countries, having willingly given of them time in reviewing papers submitted to JSIS, are listed toward the end of this issue. Of these, we wish to congratulate the following six colleagues who are the 2015 winners of the JSIS Reviewer of the Year Award: Dirk Basten, University of Cologne, Germany, Riitta Hekkala, Aalto University, Finland, Peter Seddon, University of Melbourne, Australia, Karen Stark, Queensland University of Technology, Australia, Mari-Klara Stein, Copenhagen Business School, Denmark, and Toomas Tamm, University of New South Wales, Australia. The contributions of these six colleagues are particularly noteworthy since their reviews have consistently been both impressive and insightful, and have helped authors in developing their ideas as their papers have gone through several rounds of submission. Thank you so much to all six of you, but also to all our reviewers, without whom JSIS would be unable to publish such high quality papers nor preserve the high standing it enjoys. Turning now to the contents of this issue of JSIS, we start with a Viewpoint article, ‘‘Managing inter-organizational knowledge sharing”. This paper is authored by the aforementioned Claudia Loebbecke (University of Cologne, Germany), together with Paul van Fenema (Netherlands Defence Academy, The Netherlands), and Philip Powell (Birkbeck, University of London, UK). As our regular readers will doubtless be aware, JSIS has published a range of articles on aspects of this topic for quite some time, starting with the special issue on Knowledge Management and Knowledge Management Systems edited by Leidner (2000) over 15 years’ ago, following an editorial calling for the integration of knowledge management considerations into our strategy discourse (Galliers, 1999). Since then, aspects of the topic, such as globalization and cultural issues (Leidner, 2010); knowledge sharing and transfer (Pan and Leidner, 2003; Volkoff et al., 2004; Gosain, 2007; Gupta et al., 2009); individual and collective perspectives, including group tacit knowledge (Erden et al., 2008; von Krogh, 2009), and the impact of social software (von Krogh, 2012) have all been covered. More recently, considerations of the risks associated with knowledge sharing across networks have been dealt with (Marabelli and Newell, 2012; Trkman and Desouza, 2012) in addition, and this is a topic that Loebbecke and colleagues deal with too. In the current article, they consider the ‘‘strategic paradox” (to use their term), of protecting competitive
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2016.02.007 0963-8687/Ó 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V.

2

Editorial / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 1–3

knowledge on the one hand, with the need to share such knowledge in collaborative networks on the other. They argue that this paradox suggests that ‘‘new paradigms that reconcile intra- and inter-organizational knowledge sharing” are required as a result. Building on organizational collaboration and control theory, they propose ‘‘four conﬁgurations of inter-organizational knowledge sharing for managing the paradox”. Following a critical review of the literature, the paper concludes with suggestions for further conceptual and empirical research, together with the identiﬁcation of implications for both research and practice. Our second paper in this issue deals with questions of trust – again returning to a topic ﬁrst considered in a special issue of JSIS back in 2002, edited by Sambamurthy and Jarvenpaa (2002) and to which we have returned on a number of occasions since. For example, Bélanger and Carter (2008) consider the topic in an e-government setting, while Heiskanen et al. (2008) do so in the context of outsourcing relationships. The current paper, ‘‘Do different kinds of trust matter? An examination of the three trusting beliefs on satisfaction and purchase behavior in the buyer–seller context”, is authored by Jingjun (David) Xu (Wichita State University, USA) and Ronald Cenfetelli and Karl Aquino (The University of British Columbia, Canada). Trust in the buyer–seller context has been typically operationalized according to the McKnight tripartite conception of trusting beliefs (see, for example, McKnight and Chervany, 2002; McKnight et al., 2002). According to this model, three beliefs (integrity, benevolence and competence) are key components. While considerable research has been conducted on trust in the buyer–seller context, there has been relatively little that has examined ‘‘the relative effect of these three individual trusting beliefs on satisfaction and purchase behavior”. The authors report on results arising from a buyer–broker simulation study they conducted. The results ‘‘support that (1) a buyer’s belief in a seller’s benevolence is a stronger predictor of satisfaction than the belief in a seller’s competence; (2) a buyer’s belief in a seller’s competence is a stronger predictor of purchase behavior than are beliefs in a seller’s integrity and benevolence”. Their paper is important in that it enhances our theoretical understanding concerning the dimensions of trust that play more important roles in inﬂuencing satisfaction and purchase behavior. Additionally, the paper gives guidance to practitioners ‘‘enabling them to focus on the development and training foci that best prepare customer relationship employees on the diverse aspects of trust most salient to customer needs”. Our next paper returns us to the use of Transaction Cost Economics (TCE) in IS research – again, one of those topics that JSIS has covered in some depth over the years (e.g., Watjatrakul, 2005; Lacity et al., 2011; Jain and Thietart, 2013). The current paper is by Michael Schermann (Santa Clara University, USA), Philip Yetton (Deakin University, Australia), and Konrad Dongus and Helmut Krcmar (Technical University, Munich, Germany). Titled, ‘‘The Role of Transaction Cost Economics in Information Technology Outsourcing Research: A Meta-Analysis of the Choice of Contract Type”, the authors consider what they believe to be inconsistent ﬁndings in recent information technology outsourcing (ITO) research that end in recommending different strategies in resolving the inconsistencies: ‘‘One is to improve the methodological rigor, speciﬁcally, the operationalization of TCE constructs. The other is to abandon TCE in favor of a new analytical framework.” As a result of this apparent incongruence, the authors undertake ‘‘a meta-analysis of the empirical ﬁndings on the choice of contract type as a function of task uncertainty”. While reporting results that support both the above strategies, they make the claim that ‘‘TCE is of limited relevance in recent ITO research for predicting the choice of contract type”, and form the conclusion that ‘‘ITO research requires a new analytical framework to further develop the theory of ITO and to provide sound guidance to the ITO industry”. Given the nature of the ﬁndings, and the long standing history of the use of TCE concepts in ITO research, we thought that it would helpful to continue the debate we ﬁrst introduced some ﬁve years’ ago. At that time, when Lacity et al. (2011) responded to Alaghehband et al. (2011), we noted that, ‘‘The papers provide a lively debate . . . with the help of review comments and iterative revisions, they have now converged on reviewing an overlapping set of empirical papers on this topic. There is agreement between the two papers that the empirical support for TC[E] in ITO is mixed, with both papers offering several reasons. Where they differ is what to do about moving forward. The ﬁrst paper suggests ways in which TCT can be more faithfully appropriated. The second paper is more radical, proposing the need to develop an endogenous theory of IT[E], and providing some indication of what such a theory might comprise by identifying key constructs, and a few initial propositions” (Galliers and Jarvenpaa, 2011, p. 123). In the following year, a paper by Marabelli and Newell (2012) provided a commentary in response to a paper by Trkman and Desouza (2012), both of which are mentioned above in relation to our treatment of knowledge sharing risks. A recent Editorial Board meeting, held at ICIS in Fort Worth, TX last December, concluded that JSIS should invite more debates of this kind, and thus it was that we invited Mary Lacity and Shaji Kahn (University of Missouri-St. Louis, USA) to write a commentary, and Michael Schermann and colleagues to respond. Thus, our fourth paper in this issue, ‘‘Transaction Cost Economics on Trial Again” offers us, to quote, ‘‘an opportunity to debate not only . . . TCE . . . in the context of . . . ITO, but also provides an opportunity to debate the larger issue of fair theoretical appropriations” (emphasis added). Our aim, like that of Lacity and Kahn, was not simply to provide a commentary on a single article or topic, but to invoke a more general and thoughtful conversation within the IS community on the subject of fair appropriation of theory in our discourse. In light of this aim, we also invited Benoit Aubert (Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand) and Suzanne Rivard (HEC, Montreal, Canada), and Allen Lee (Virginia Commonwealth University, USA) to provide further commentaries on this important topic. We look forward to publishing further commentaries and debates of this kind in future issues of JSIS. Thus, we trust that this initial issue of JSIS sets the scene for another successful year of publication, with thoughtful and insightful articles on major issues confronting us as an academy, particularly with the strategic agenda in mind. Once again, we have

Editorial / Journal of Strategic Information Systems 25 (2016) 1–3

3

attempted to provide an international dimension to our discourse, with articles written by colleagues in universities in no less than six different countries: Canada, Germany, The Netherlands, New Zealand, UK, and USA. As always, we welcome your comments and input. References
Alaghehband, F.K., Rivard, S., Wu, S., Goyette, S., 2011. An assessment of the use of Transaction Cost Theory in information technology outsourcing. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 20 (2), 125–138. Bélanger, F., Carter, L., 2008. Trust and risk in e-government adoption. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 17 (2), 165–176. Erden, Z., von Krogh, G., Nonaka, I., 2008. The quality of group tacit knowledge. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 17 (1), 4–18. Galliers, R.D., 1999. Towards the integration of e-business, knowledge management and policy considerations within an information systems strategy framework. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 8 (3), 229–234. Galliers, R.D., Jarvenpaa, S.L., 2011. A new departure. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 20 (2), 123–124. Gosain, S., 2007. Mobilizing software expertise in personal knowledge exchanges. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 16 (3), 254–277. Gupta, A., Mattarelli, E., Seshasai, S., Broschak, J., 2009. Use of collaborative technologies and knowledge sharing in co-located and distributed teams: towards the 24-h knowledge factory. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 18 (3), 147–161. Heiskanen, A., Newman, M., Eklin, M., 2008. Control, trust, power, and the dynamics of information system outsourcing relationships: a process study of contractual software development. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 17 (4), 268–286. Jain, A., Thietart, R.-A., 2013. Knowledge based transactions and decision framing in Information Technology Outsourcing. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 22 (4), 315– 327. Lacity, M.C., Willcocks, L.P., Kahn, S., 2011. Beyond transaction cost economics: towards an endogenous theory of information technology outsourcing. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 20 (2), 139–157. Leidner, D.E., 2000. Editorial, special issue on knowledge management and knowledge management systems. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 9 (2–3), 101–105. Leidner, D.E., 2010. Globalization, culture, and information: towards global knowledge transparency. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 19 (2), 69–77. Marabelli, M., Newell, S., 2012. Knowledge risks in organizational networks: the practice perspective. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 21 (1), 18–30. McKnight, D.H., Chervany, N.L., 2002. What trust means in e-commerce customer relationships: an interdisciplinary conceptual typology. Int. J. Electron. Comm. 6 (2), 35–59. McKnight, D.H., Choudhury, V., Kacmar, C., 2002. Developing and validating trust measures for e-commerce: an integrative typology. Inf. Syst. Res. 3 (3), 334–359. Pan, S.L., Leidner, D.E., 2003. Bridging communities of practice with information technology in pursuit of global knowledge sharing. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 12 (1), 71–88. Sambamurthy, V., Jarvenpaa, S.L., 2002. JSIS editorial—Special issue on ‘‘Trust in the Digital Economy. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 11 (3-4), 183–185. Trkman, P., Desouza, K.C., 2012. Knowledge risks in organizational networks: an exploratory framework. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 21 (1), 1–17. Volkoff, O., Elmes, M.B., Strong, D., 2004. Enterprise systems, knowledge transfer and power users. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 13 (4), 279–304. von Krogh, G., 2009. Individualist and collectivist perspectives on knowledgein organizations: implications for information systems research. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 18 (3), 119–129. von Krogh, G., 2012. How does social software change knowledge management? Toward a strategic research agenda. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 21 (2), 154–164. Watjatrakul, B., 2005. Determinants of IS sourcing decisions: a comparative study of transaction cost theory versus the resource-based view. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 14 (4), 389–415.

R.D. Galliers Bentley University, USA Loughborough University, UK Sirkka L. Jarvenpaa University of Texas at Austin, USA Available online 5 March 2016

