RESEARCH ARTICLE

PIRATES IN THE LAB: USING INCENTIVIZED CHOICE EXPERIMENTS TO EXPLORE PREFERENCE FOR (UN)AUTHORIZED CONTENT1
Piotr Ćwiakowski, Marek Giergiczny, and Michał Krawczk
Faculty of Economic Sciences, University of Warsaw, 44/50 Długa Street, 00-241 Warsaw, POLAND {pcwiakowski@wne.uw.edu.pl} {mgiergiczny@wne.uw.edu.pl} {mkrawczyk@wne.uw.edu.pl}

In this paper, we report on a laboratory experiment aimed at investigating factors affecting choice between different versions of a full-length movie. In particular, we are able to pin down the willingness to pay for a legal, rather than pirated, copy and compare it to the impact of such characteristics as picture quality or delay in delivery. We find a modest but highly significant preference for the authorized version. We also find that when the proceeds from legal sales are transferred to a good cause, willingness to pay for the unauthorized copy is reduced. Our method does not seem to suffer from hypothetical bias. Keywords: Digital piracy, choice experiments

Introduction1
Computer piracy is a hallmark of our era, fueling fears that demand for legal copies of cultural goods may soon disappear. Because attempts to stop this wave by technical and legal means have only been partly successful, the key question is how much end-users are ready to pay to obtain legal rather than unauthorized content per se depending on circumstances. This has obvious direct consequences, especially for novel business models based on variations of the pay-whatyou-want system. In this study, we investigated the trade-off between legality and other characteristics of the product. We have done so by observing choices between different versions of full-length movies that had real consequence. By applying a choice experiment methodology, we were able to measure willingness-to-pay (WTP) for legal rather than illegal content as it compares to valuation of other features of the product.
Rahul Telang was the accepting senior editor for this paper. Ram Chellappa served as the associate editor. The appendices for this paper are located in the “Online Supplements” section of the MIS Quarterly’s website (http://www.misq.org).
1

Our work is related to some recent studies investigating WTP for music from an authorized source, in particular investigating the effect of risk and embarrassment involved in piracy (Sinha and Mandel 2008) and (Sinha et al. 2009) focusing on digital rights management. Both of these studies used hypothetical contingent valuation surveys that did not allow investigating determinants of WTP. In particular, they did not juxtapose WTP for legal versus illegal consumption. Pursuing this comparison Rob and Waldfogel (2004) found that consumers valued downloaded (i.e., pirated) albums much below purchased music. Extant work on piracy using field data, such as statistics of sales and peer-to-peer traffic (Aguiar and Martens 2013; Danaher et al. 2014; Liebowitz and Zentner 2012; Smith and Telang 2009; Stevans and Sessions 2005) also gives us some understanding of consumers’ preferences. For example, given that many but not all consumers engage in illicit downloading, presumably there is some positive but low and heterogeneous WTP for the legal version. A major difficulty in this research is that, using field data, we usually know very little about the menu of options the consumer had. For example, a free pirated copy might be available but it may require some skill to find it; it may be difficult to judge quality before downloading; consumers might sense that there is some risk asso-

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3, pp. 709-715/September 2016

709

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

ciated with piracy, but we do not know to what extent they may under- or overestimate it. Moreover, in the field, we hardly have the opportunity to manipulate such important dimensions, thereby eliciting trade-offs between them. Behavioral models typically verified using questionnaire data (Gopal et al. 2004) can achieve more in this respect. The advantage of this approach is that the researcher is able to obtain specific information concerning several aspects of behavior, including the ethical dimension (Al-Rafee and Cronan 2006; Goles et al. 2008; Moores and Chang 2006). Extant questionnaire-based literature does not seek to directly estimate trade-offs between legality and other characteristics of the product. This task could naturally be addressed using a discrete choice experiment. The responder faces several choice sets, each containing a few alternatives. Each of them is defined by specific values of attributes of interest. This approach enables the researcher to estimate how characteristics of a product affect consumer’s WTP. Yet, to the best of our knowledge, choice experiments have not been used to investigate digital piracy so far. An unattractive feature of choice experiments and other questionnaire-based approaches is that the hypothetical nature of the decision task that the subject is facing may result in a bias (Murphy et al. 2005), especially in the case of valuing moral (or immoral) goods (Johansson-Stenman and Svedsater 2012). Hypothetical choice experiments, especially those concerning sensitive questions when behavior might diverge from the legal and/or ethical norm, should thus be subject to a reality check. This concern, among others, has fueled recent attempts to investigate piracy using incentivized laboratory experiments, often within the paradigm of public good games (Hashim et al. 2014; Hashim et al. 2011). There are also isolated studies that used experimental methods to elicit WTP for music (Adomaviciuset al. 2012; Maffioletti and Ramello 2004). In our study, we tried to make the best of the two worlds. We ran a discrete choice experiment to let subjects disclose their preference for various characteristics of a cultural good, a full-length movie.2 However, on top of the standard, hypothetical procedure, we ran treatments that had experiential and monetary consequences for the decision maker and whatever other parties were involved.
2 We are aware that attitude toward piracy and thus WTP for a legal rather than illegal copy may be grossly domain-specific. Our design could be applied to investigate consumption of other cultural goods, not only movies. The key assumption is merely that of an Internet user, who has two primary options: either obtain a copy from an authorized source, or from an unauthorized one.

Our main contribution is thus that, unlike in field studies, we can systematically manipulate important dimensions affecting consumers’ valuations and perfectly observe their choices at the individual level. Yet, unlike previous lab experiments, we provide a naturally framed, realistic decision-making context. Finally, unlike in survey studies, subjects’ choices undergo a reality check, in that they might have real, direct, and immediate consequences. We also ask whether it makes a difference what happens with the proceeds from sales; it may be less appealing to avoid payment if a good cause is harmed in this way (Grolleau et al. 2008).

Design and Procedures
In the experiment, participants were seated in a computer laboratory and asked to read printed instruction. They were told they had 40 PLN (approximately 10 euros) to be kept or spent to watch a movie of their choice. They were shown a list of seven preselected titles3 and asked to choose the one they wanted to see during the course of the experiment. They went on to learn about possible characteristics of the copy to be watched. These attributes are reported in Table 1. Subjects were given detailed descriptions (see Appendix B). Of the five dimensions used, legality and price of the copy are necessary to estimate WTP for legality.4 Regarding quality, Chiang and Assane (2009) considered it as factor that might make people choose authorized content. The risk of penalty was widely discussed in previous research as an important determinant of piracy prevalence and consumption patterns (Sinha and Mandel 2008; Stolpe 2000; Yoon 2002). Delay of consumption was chosen to represent possible differences in usability of sites offering digital content (Sinha and Mandel 2008). A few comments on the specific values used may be necessary. The range of prices used generally corresponds to typical levels of micro-payments found at unauthorized streaming websites or legitimate VOD services in Poland. Note that subjects did not get a copy of the movie they watched to take home, so costs of these services (rather than a DVD price) seem to be the suitable benchmark. Regarding quality, there is legitimate concern if heterogeneity on this dimension still plays a major role. Admittedly, legal versions are, generally speaking, of high quality and with widespread high-speed Internet connection it is usually easy to download a top-notch blu-ray rip from a BitTorrent site, for example.

3

See the Appendix A for information on how these were selected.

Obviously, pricing plays a crucial role in the piracy literature (Breidert and Hahsler 2007; Danaher et al. 2014; Shiller and Waldfogel 2013).

4

710

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3/September 2016

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

Table 1. Movie Attributes
Attribute Legality Levels Legal Illegal Risk Price Penalty No penalty High Medium Low Free High quality Low quality Immediate Delayed Description A legal copy would be used, the proceeds (price) going to the legitimate copyright holder or the Polish Film Institute An illegal copy would be used, the proceeds (price) going to tnttorrent.info, provider of unauthorized content 30% chance of a penalty of 25 PLN No risk involved 15 PLN 10 PLN 5 PLN 0 PLN Quality of a DVD copy (approximately 1800 kbps) Inferior quality (approximately 150 kbps) The movie was available directly following the last choice set The movie was available only after 15 minutes

Picture quality Delay

Its availability may depend on many factors, however, including actions taken by copyright holders, efficacy of notice, and take down procedure, popularity of the movie, time elapsed since the premiere, etc. DVDrip, DVDScreen, TeleScreen, and CAMrip versions, which are obviously of much lower quality of vision and sound, tend to appear sooner and can be downloaded quicker, thus they certainly remain a relevant option. Concerns about delay in consumption also appear to be an important factor in the field. Users often complain about wasting their time searching for the film, registering as a customer, and being forced to watch advertisements, whether the site is authorized or not. Most of them are also quite familiar with the trade-off between price and delay in that skipping the ads may be possible but subject to a (higher) fee. The risk variable is most stylized of all, as it would be highly impractical to implement in the lab a (much lower) probability of quite substantial financial and otherwise legal consequences of piracy that could be relevant in the field. Given these considerations, not all theoretically possible combinations were used. A legal copy would always come with high quality of picture and with no penalty. Each choice set contained two alternatives of watching the movie that could differ on any of the dimensions, and a third one, “I don’t watch anything” (see Appendix C, Figure C1 for a typical screenshot and Tables C1 and C2 for the complete list of choice sets used).5 We have included this option because, in

practice, trade-offs between characteristics are only relevant in the domain in which the agent is willing to consume the product; there is little point in eliciting preference between goods that are unwanted anyway.6 Additional details, including summary statistics of movie attributes, can be found in the SOM. In each session, one of two conditions could be used. In the baseline condition (BC), participants were informed that the price they paid for a legal copy (if any) would be passed to the copyright owners. In the good cause condition (GCC), they knew that all of the proceeds would be passed to The Polish Film Institute, a reputable public organization which subsidizes Polish noncommercial and commercial film projects. In either condition, any price paid for an unauthorized copy would be transferred to the pirate website tnttorrent.info. The reason for which we had indeed made these obligations was to make the consequences of paying (or pirating) in our experiment identical to those of taking such actions outside the lab. Had we not done so, the participants could rightly perceive their decisions to contribute to watching a legal copy as solely benefitting the experimenter rather than supporting the artists and producers or any other cause. In addition to these treatments, which we call real (R), we have also conducted sessions under a hypothetical condition
6

5 The attributes were displayed in alphabetical order in the Polish language: price, delay, quality, legality, risk. By chance, the seemingly crucial dimension (price) came first, and interrelated factors (legality, quality, risk) were grouped together.

Anticipating that some of our subjects may end up with no movie at all, in the e-mail invitation, we encouraged them to bring a book or similar form of back-up entertainment. However, we blocked Internet access and notebooks and tablets were forbidden, so subjects were not able to watch a movie of their choice free of charge on the web. In this sense, our experiment emulated a world in which pirated movies are not necessarily freely available, but nobody is forced to see any movie at all.

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3/September 2016

711

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

(H) in which subjects made analogous choices and were simply asked to imagine that these had any real consequence. When done, they proceeded to another, unrelated experiment (and were paid a fixed fee of 10 PLN plus whatever they earned in the second experiment). In this way, we could make sure that the length of the R and H sessions and subjects’ earnings were comparable, which also allowed us to advertise all of them in exactly the same way, so that selection could not affect treatment effects (if any). The experiment was conducted in the Laboratory of Experimental Economics, at the Faculty of Economics, University of Warsaw, in February and March of 2013. A total of 228 subjects took part in the 12 sessions (three for each of the four treatments: R-BC, R-GCC, H-BC, and H-GCC). Subjects were invited through the ORSEE Internet recruitment system (Greiner 2004) from the local subject pool. Most of them were students, with a mean age of 23. About 55 percent of the participants were female.

The negative and statistically significant estimates for the fixed MNL coefficients and the MIXL means for DELAY, RISK, and QUALITY LOW imply that movies associated with these levels are less likely to be chosen. In the MNL model, the price coefficient is negative and highly significant. When moving from the fixed coefficient MNL model to MIXL (a model that allows for random taste heterogeneity), we obtain an improvement in the loglikelihood by 611.1 units, which comes at the cost of 15 additional parameters.10 This improvement is highly significant and indicates that substantial random heterogeneity in tastes is present. In addition to preference estimates we calculate willingnessto-pay (WTP) for the movie characteristics. For example, because the estimated preference coefficient for RISK in Model 1 is 10.64 times larger than for price (Table 2), we conclude that mean WTP to avoid risk is 10.64 PLN. The calculated trade-offs for both models are reported in Table 3. As can be seen in Table 3, LEGAL is on average worth about 3 PLN more than ILLEGAL in either model. The two models also give quite consistent WTP values for the remaining attributes, with the highest negative value being associated with RISK, followed by QUALITY LOW, and with DELAY last. The estimates for RISK are somewhat higher than the expected value of the loss associated with this feature (7.5 PLN), suggesting moderate risk aversion, which is typically found in experimental studies. Also, the opportunity cost of time implied by the estimates for DELAY is reasonable, as a typical simple student job would pay 10 to 15 PLN per hour. We also would like to highlight that 219 subjects chose a movie alternative in at least one choice situation (i.e., almost all subjects were willing, at some stage, to trade off money for watching a movie). We consider these observations as indicators that the experiment was correctly designed and conducted. Based on the observations, we conclude that the data form a valid basis to test whether there is an impact of treatments on preference and WTP estimates. We compare REAL versus HYPOTHETICAL (HYPO) and GCC versus BC conditions. In both cases, the following two models are estimated: a model with treatment-specific parameters and a generic model with preference parameters for both treatments restricted to be equal. Standard LR tests are used to see if the model with treatment specific estimates outperforms the generic model. All tests are conducted within the standard MNL framework.

Results
We now proceed with a detailed analysis of results.7 We tested several different utility specifications. The one with the best fit assumes different alternative specific constants for LEGAL and ILLEGAL and generic parameters for PRICE and DELAY.8 In Table 2, we present results for the multinomial logit (MNL) model (Model 1) and mixed logit (MIXL) model (Model 2). Both models were estimated using best choices only as the preferences that drive responses to second best answers have been found statistically different to those for first best choices.9 For both models, the signs of the coefficients are the same and consistent with a priori expectations. The estimates for alternative-specific constants (ASC) for both LEGAL and ILLEGAL indicate that respondents, on average, would like to watch a movie and ceteris paribus LEGAL copy is preferred over ILLEGAL.
7

The details of modeling methodology are described in Appendix D.

8

Assuming an alternative specific estimate for PRICE and DELAY did not improve model fit; that is, likelihood ratio test statistic = 0.86, df = 2 implies p-value = 0.65 (multinomial logit model).

9 Preference stability across stages was tested with the use of log-likelihood ratio test (LR), which indicated that restricting parameters to be equal across stages would result in significant worsening of the log-likelihood (i.e., the LR test statistic =101.8, with the number of restrictions equal to 6 implies p-value = 0.00). Our results, regarding preference instability in ranking, are in line with the results reported in Ben-Akiva et al. (1991), Foster and Mourato (2002), Giergiczny et al. (2013), and Hausman and Ruud (1987).

The elements of the Choleski matrix for log-normally distributed PRICE and five normally distributed non-cost coefficients.

10

712

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3/September 2016

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

Table 2. MNL and MIXL Results
MODEL 1: MNL MODEL 2: MIXL coef. t-stat coef. t-stat -.120 -17.80 -1.695 -18.61 -.261 -5.02 -.536 -5.97 -1.278 -13.24 -2.706 -14.89 -.808 -8.39 -1.738 -9.44 1.934 20.53 4.579 16.24 1.613 17.31 4.052 15.26 Standard Deviations 0.207 13.06 .493 5.27 2.113 9.51 1.311 5.62 3.305 13.73 3.245 11.76 -2643.83 -2032.73 6 27 2736

PRICE DELAY RISK QUAL ASC_L ASC_IL PRICE DELAY RISK QUAL ASC_L ASC_IL Log likelihood K N

Table 3. WTP (Trade-Offs Against PRICE) Calculated for Generic and Specific Models
Model 1 Mean -2.17 -10.64 -6.72 16.10 13.43 Mean -2.89 -14.99 -9.62 25.46 22.37 Model 2 Std. dev. 2.79 12.37 7.55 19.09 18.98 Median -2.08 -11.33 -7.35 19.76 17.15

DELAY RISK QUAL ASC_L ASC_IL

The test results indicate that there are no statistically significant differences11 in preference estimates between REAL and HYPO, which implies that, in our exercise, individuals in the hypothetical and real setting behaved in a very similar manner. Conversely, for GCC versus BC, we identify a moderate treatment effect (i.e., the model with treatmentspecific parameters outperforms the generic model: LR = 10.82, df = 6, p-value = 0.094). WTP for a pirated version is slightly lower under GCC (details upon request), when proceeds from legal sales would support the good cause, possibly because piracy carries greater moral weight in such a case.

Conclusions
There are a few lessons that can be drawn from our study. On the methodological level, it confirms that choice experiment methodology can be successfully used to investigate preference for authorized versus unauthorized content in a controlled laboratory environment. Indeed, we were able to quantify trade-offs between various dimensions affecting consumer’s decisions. Estimates for all the variables suggest that most participants have made reasonable, thoughtful choices; negative features such as small delay in movie consumption or inferior quality made the given option less likely to be chosen. The individual WTPs showed substantial heterogeneity but were in a reasonable range for most subjects. Further, we have not seen any evidence of hypothetical bias, which suggests that subsequent studies can skip the tedious procedure we went through. In other words, subjects were not particularly reluctant to admit in the hypothetical

11

The test statistics: LR = 3.2 (df = 6, p-value = 0.78).

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3/September 2016

713

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

condition what they would really do if it was truly about their own money. On a more practical level, our results indicate that there is a positive willingness to pay for an authorized version of the content, although it seems to be quite low. Again, it should be related to the cost of watching a VOD once, rather than a DVD purchase. Moreover, it is natural to expect the WTP for authorized content to be strongly income-dependent (Chiang and Assane 2009). With average net salary of some 720 USD (2014 data), Poland still lags behind the world’s richest economies, so analogous WTPs would likely be considerably higher there. In any case, the participants clearly show willingness to pay for such features of the product as quality and immediate access. Thus, a carefully chosen combination of piracy prevention, suitable distribution channels, and attractive pricing appears to be a viable business option for the copyright holders, even if pirated copies are widely and cheaply (freely) available. For example, improving functionality of the website, and thereby reducing the time it effectively takes the customer to start enjoying the content, plays a role. Still, specific values we have obtained indicate, for example, that, other things being equal, most individuals would be willing to accept a short delay (e.g., due to advertisements) if that was required to watch the movie from a legal source. The same goes for quality: legal distributors might seek their advantage over the pirates. Overall, our findings do not support the gloomy and widespread perspective that the users will get all content via torrents no matter how hard the copyright holders try. Our results might also shed some light on the ongoing discussion regarding changes in copyright law. Higher WTP for legitimate copies may indicate that current regulations are largely consistent with ethical norms. This is an argument against revolutionary changes that would grossly reduce copyright protection. At the same time, our findings emphasize the role of fair use: our subjects did not treat copyright protection as an absolute rule, denying all exceptions. Furthermore, results concerning the threat of punishment confirm earlier reports that it may be a serious deterrent, and not one that crowds out intrinsic motivation to obey the law. To the extent that individuals are sensitive to expected punishment, amendments to procedural law aimed at simplifications allowing swift enforcement will be obviously beneficial. According to provisions of law currently in force, the transaction costs of law enforcement are typically too high for copyright holders.

References
Adomavicius, G., Bockstedt, J., Curley, S., and Zhang, J. 2012. “Effects of Online Recommendations on Consumers’ Willingness

to Pay,” in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Human Decision Making in Recommender Systems (Decisions@ RecSys ’12), Dublin, Ireland, pp. 40-45. Aguiar, L., and Martens, B. 2013. “Digital Music Consumption on the Internet: Evidence from Clickstream Data,” JRC Technical Reports, Institute for Prospective Technological Studies, Digital Economy Working Paper 2013/04. Al-Rafee, S., and Cronan, T. P. 2006. “Digital Piracy: Factors that Influence Attitude toward Behavior,” Journal of Business Ethics (63:3), pp. 237-259. Ben-Akiva, M., Morikawa, T., and Shiroishi, F. 1991. “Analysis of the Reliability of Preference Ranking Data,” Journal of Business Research (23:3), pp. 253-268. Breidert, C., and Hahsler, M. 2007. “Adaptive Conjoint Analysis for Pricing Music Downloads,” in Advances in Data Analysis: Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Gesellschaft für Klassifikation, R. Decker and H.-J. Lenz (eds.), Berlin: SpringerVerlag, pp. 409-416. Chiang, E. P., and Assane, D. “Estimating the Willingness to Pay for Digital Music,” Contemporary Economic Policy (27:4), pp. 512-522. Danaher, D., Huang, Y., Smith, M. D., and Telang, R. 2014. “An Empirical Analysis of Digital Music Nundling Strategies,” Management Science (60:6), pp. 1413-1433. Foster, V., and Mourato, S. 2002. “Testing for Consistency in Contingent Ranking Experiments,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management (44:2), pp. 309-328. Giergiczny, M., Hess, S., Dekker, T., and Chintakayala, P. K. 2013. “Testing the Consistency (or Lack Thereof) Between Choices in Best–Worst Surveys,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Choice Modelling Conference, Sydney, July 3-5,. Goles, T., Jayatilaka, B., George, B., Parsons, L., Chambers, V., Taylor, D., and Brune, R. 2008. “Softlifting: Exploring Determinants of Attitude,” Journal of Business Ethics (77:4), pp. 481-499. Gopal, R. D., Sanders, G. L., Bhattacharjee, S., Agrawal, M., and Wagner, S. C. 2004. “A Behavioral Model of Digital Music Piracy,” Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce (14:2), pp. 89-105. Greiner, B. 2004. “The Online Recruitment System ORSEE 2.0: A Guide for the Organization of Experiments in Economics,” Working Paper Series in Economics, University of Cologne. Grolleau, G., Mzoughi, N., and Sutan, A. 2008. “Please Do Not Pirate It, You Will Rob the Poor! An Experimental Investigation on the Effect of Charitable Donations on Piracy,” Journal of Socio-Economics (37:6), pp. 2417-2426. Hashim, M., Kannan, K., Maximiano, S., and Rees, J. 2014. “Digital Piracy, Teens, and the Source of Advice: An Experimental Study,” Journal of Management Information Systems (31:2), pp. 211-244. Hashim, M., Maximiano, S., and Kannan, K. 2011. “Information Targeting and Coordination: An Experimental Study,” paper presented to the 10th Workshop on the Economics of Information Security, George Mason University. Hausman, J. A., and Ruud, P. A. 1987. “Specifying and Testing Econometric Models for Rank-Ordered Data,” Journal of Econometrics (34:1), pp. 83-104.

714

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3/September 2016

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

Johansson-Stenman, O., and Svedsäter, H. 2012. “Self-Image and Valuation of Moral Goods: Stated Versus Actual Willingness to Pay,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization (84:3), pp. 879-891. Liebowitz, S. J., and Zentner, A. 2012. “Clash of the Titans: Does Internet Use Reduce Television Viewing?,” Review of Economics and Statistics (94:1), pp. 234-245. Maffioletti, A., and Ramello, G. B. 2004. “Should We Put Them In Jail? Copyright Infringement, Penalties and Consumer Behaviour Insights from Experimental Data,” Review of Economic Research on Copyright Issues (1:2), pp. 81-95. Moores, T. T., and Chang, J. C-J. 2006. “Ethical Decision Making in Software Piracy: Initial Development and Test of a FourComponent Model,” MIS Quarterly (30:1), pp. 167-180. Murphy, J. J., Allen, P. G., Stevens, T. H., and Weatherhead, D. 2005. “A Meta-Analysis of Hypothetical Bias in Stated Preference Valuation,” Environmental and Resource Economics (30:3), pp. 313-325. Rob, R., and Waldfogel, J. 2004. “Piracy on the High C’s: Music Downloading, Sales Displacement, and Social Welfare in a Sample of College Students,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Shiller, B., and Waldfogel, J. 2013. “The Challenge of Revenue Sharing with Bundled Pricing: An Application to Music,” Economic Inquiry (51:2), pp. 1155-1165. Sinha, R. K., and Mandel, N. 2008. “Preventing Digital Music Piracy: The Carrot or the Stick?,” Journal of Marketing (72:1), pp. 1-15. Sinha, R. K., Machado, F. S., and Sellman, C. 2009. “Digital Rights Management or Discard Restrictions on Music? DRM, Peer-to-Peer Piracy and the Pricing of Digital Music,” Journal of Marketing (74:2), pp. 40-54. Smith, M. D., and Telang, R. 2009. “Competing with Free: The Impact of Movie Broadcasts on DVD Sales and Internet Piracy,” MIS Quarterly (33:2), pp. 321-338. Stevans, L. K., and Sessions, D. N. 2005. “An Empirical Investigation into the Effect of Music Downloading on the Con-

sumer Expenditure of Recorded Music: A Time Series Approach,” Journal of Consumer Policy (28:3), pp. 311-324. Stolpe, M. 2000. “Protection Against Software Piracy: A Study of Technology Adoption for the Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology (9:1), pp. 25-52. Yoon, K. 2002. “The Optimal Level of Copyright Protection,” Information Economics and Policy (14:3), pp. 327-348.

About the Authors
Piotr Ćwiakowski is a doctoral candidate at the Faculty of Economic Sciences, University of Warsaw. His dissertation concerns modeling consumer preferences in the real estate market. Apart from investigating preferences toward real estate and copyright goods, he is developing tax-benefit microsimulation models for the Polish Ministry of Finance. Marek Giergiczny is an assistant professor at the Faculty of Economic Sciences, University of Warsaw, and a researcher at the Warsaw Ecological Economics Center. His research interests include environmental and resource economics and discrete choice models. He has published in journals including BioScience, Land Economics, and Transportmetrica. Michał Krawczyk received his Ph.D. from the University of Amsterdam and is currently an assistant professor at the Faculty of Economic Sciences, University of Warsaw. His research interests comprise several subfields of behavioral and experimental economics. He has published in American Economic Review, Experimental Economics, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Journal of Economic Psychology, Journal of the European Economic Association, Journal of Public Economics, and PLoS ONE.

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3/September 2016

715

716

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3/September 2016

RESEARCH ARTICLE

PIRATES IN THE LAB: USING INCENTIVIZED CHOICE EXPERIMENTS TO EXPLORE PREFERENCE FOR (UN)AUTHORIZED CONTENT
Piotr Ćwiakowski, Marek Giergiczny, and Michał Krawczk
Faculty of Economic Sciences, University of Warsaw, 44/50 Długa Street, 00-241 Warsaw, POLAND {pcwiakowski@wne.uw.edu.pl} {mgiergiczny@wne.uw.edu.pl} {mkrawczyk@wne.uw.edu.pl}

Appendix A
Web-Based Pilot Survey
We started the project by selecting the movies on which our subjects were to place a value. We picked 30 movies produced after 1990 from the “TOP 250” list posted by a leading website (imdb.com) with the duration of each movie being between 100 and 125 minutes. We developed a web-based pilot survey showing the title, genre, year of premiere, short description, and trailer of each production. Our 49 student responders were asked to imagine they were planning to spend the following 2 hours watching movies and to rate each of the titles on a scale of 1 to 6, where 1 indicated they did not want to see the movie at all and 6 meant they did want to see it very much. We were able to come up with a list of seven movies where 78% of the subjects surveyed rated at least one of them as a 5 or 6. The screenshot of the typical question from the pilot survey is presented in Figure A1.

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3—Appendices/September 2016

A1

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

Figure A1. Rating of a Movie in the Web-Based Pilot

A2

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3—Appendices/September 2016

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

Appendix B
Explanation of Movie Attributes
In the experiment proper, participants were seated in a computer laboratory and asked to read printed instructions. They were shown the list of seven movies (picked in the web-based pilot described in Appendix A) and asked to select the one they wanted to see during the course of the experiment. Then they went on to learn about possible characteristics of the copy to be watched. We provide the complete description of the attributes available for participants of experiment below.

Price
This attribute determines the price you will have to pay to view a given copy. It can take one of four values: • • • • free: 0 PLN low: 5 PLN medium: 10 PLN high: 15 PLN

For example, if, given your decisions and the outcome of the random mechanism described before, you watch a movie with “medium” price, your earnings will be reduced by 10 PLN.

Delay
This attribute determines how much you will have to wait after the last decision screen before you can watch the movie. It has two levels: • • movie available immediately: you will not have to wait to watch the movie movie available in 15 minutes: you will have to wait idly for 15 minutes before you can watch the movie

The total time you will spend in the lab will also be longer if you have to wait for the movie.

Legality
This attribute indicates the source of the copy. It has two levels: • A legal copy: the movie was acquired from an authorized source. The copyright holders are aware of the viewing and approve of it. The price you are paying is transferred to [BC: the copyright holders] [GCC: the Polish Film Institute]. An illegal copy: the movie was acquired from an unauthorized source. The copyright holders are unaware of the viewing and have not approved of it. The price you are paying is transferred to the owners of a website hosting unauthorized movies.

•

In any case, the authors of this article guarantee that the relevant entity receives the appropriate amount. We will give you additional information momentarily.

Picture Quality
This attribute determines quality of the copy. It takes two levels: • • high quality: the movie will be shown in DVD picture quality. low quality: the movie will be shown in inferior picture quality. You can access samples of high and low quality by clicking the blue buttons at the bottom of the screen.

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3—Appendices/September 2016

A3

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

All legal copies come in high quality. High quality is just as high, no matter whether a copy is legal or not.

Risk
This attribute determines if watching the copy is associated with a risk of inspection and penalty. It takes two levels: • no penalty • penalty possible: a penalty of 25 PLN will follow with probability 30% A legal copy is never associated with a risk of penalty. Should you watch a copy for which a penalty is possible, the computer will randomly determine at the end of the experiment whether you lose 25 PLN (which will happen with probability 30%) or not.

Appendix C
Choice Set Design
Typical Choice Set in the Main Study
In the example presented in Figure C1, the responder has already indicated Alternative 1 as the best and Alternative 3, “I don’t watch anything,” as a second-best choice.

Figure C1. Typical Choice Set in the Main Study

A4

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3—Appendices/September 2016

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

In order to maximize the amount of information, the subjects were asked to rank the options from the best to the worst (rather than simply pick what they liked most) on each of 12 choice sets. The Bayesian d-efficient design optimized for the multinomial logit model (MNL) model was used to generate the choice sets in sessions 5 through 12 based on the priors taken from sessions 1 through 4 , in which optimal-in-difference design was used. Tables C1 and C2 show all choice sets used in our design. Note that each set had one legal and one illegal alternative; additionally, the option “I don’t watch anything” was always available. The latter was always presented as Alternative 3 on the right side of the screen, while the remaining two were shown in a balanced order: each subject would have the illegal option as Alternative 1 in six choice sets and as Alternative 2 in remaining six sets. The order of the 12 choice sets was also randomized between subjects.

Table C1. Choice Sets Used in Experiment: Sessions 1 through 4
Choice situation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Legality legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal Price 15 PLN 10 PLN 5 PLN 5 PLN 10 PLN 0 PLN 15 PLN 5 PLN 0 PLN 0 PLN 15 PLN 15 PLN 5 PLN 0 PLN 15 PLN 5 PLN 10 PLN 10 PLN 15 PLN 15 PLN 10 PLN 10 PLN 5 PLN 0 PLN Delay delayed immediate delayed immediate immediate delayed immediate delayed immediate delayed delayed immediate delayed delayed delayed immediate immediate delayed delayed immediate immediate delayed immediate immediate penalty no penalty penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty penalty no penalty no penalty Risk no penalty Quality high high high low high low high high high low high high high low high high high low high high high high high low

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3—Appendices/September 2016

A5

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

Table C2. Choice Sets Used in Experiment: Sessions 5 through 12
Choice Situation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Legality legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal legal illegal Price 10 PLN 0 PLN 15 PLN 15 PLN 15 PLN 0 PLN 15 PLN 15 PLN 0 PLN 0 PLN 15 PLN 0 PLN 5 PLN 0 PLN 5 PLN 5 PLN 10 PLN 5 PLN 15 PLN 0 PLN 15 PLN 0 PLN 10 PLN 5 PLN Delay immediate delayed delayed immediate immediate delayed delayed immediate delayed immediate delayed immediate immediate delayed delayed immediate immediate delayed delayed immediate immediate delayed immediate delayed Risk no penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty penalty no penalty no penalty no penalty penalty no penalty penalty no penalty penalty no penalty penalty no penalty penalty no penalty no penalty Quality high high high high high low high low high high high low high low high low high high high high high low high high

Table C3. Summary Statistics of Attributes of llegal Alternatives (Sessions 1 through 4)
Variable price delay low quality risk Mean 6.25 0.5 0.5 0.5 Std. Dev. 5.690902 0.522233 0.522233 0.522233 Min 0 0 0 0 Max 15 1 1 1

Table C4. Summary Statistics of Attributes of Legal Alternatives (Session 1 through 4)
Variable price delay Mean 6.25 0.5 Std. Dev. 5.22233 0.522233 Min 0 0 Max 15 1

A6

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3—Appendices/September 2016

Ćwiakowski et al./Incentivized Choice Experiments

Table C5. Summary Statistics of Attributes of Illegal Alternatives (Session 5 through 12)
Variable price delay low quality risk Mean 3.75 0.5 0.5 0.5 Std. Dev. 5.690902 0.522233 0.522233 0.522233 Min 0 0 0 0 Max 15 1 1 1

Table C6. Summary Statistics of Attributes of Legal Alternatives (Sessions 1 through 4)
Variable price delay Mean 10.83333 0.5 Std. Dev. 5.149287 0.522233 Min 0 0 Max 15 1

Appendix D
Modeling Methodology
In a random utility context, respondents are assumed to identify the best alternative or the (partial) preference ordering based on the relative position of the available alternatives in terms of their utility levels. To maximize the amount of information on the underlying preference structure, subjects in our study were asked to provide full preference ordering, not just their first best. The standard way of analyzing this type of data is the use of exploded logit formula, which is a product of standard multinomial logit formulas. The multinomial logit model (MNL) and exploded logit were thus our baseline models. In the MNL model, the panel specification of the sandwich error estimator was used to accommodate the repeated choice nature of the data (see Hess et al. 2011). In addition to the MNL,the data were analyzed with a mixed logit model (MIXL). In MIXL we used the panel specification (Revelt and Train 1998); it was assumed that taste parameters vary across respondents according to a specified mixing distribution but stay constant across multiple choices for the same respondent.1 In our work, we assumed the mixing distribution to be a mixture of normal and log-normal densities with unrestricted correlation structure. All non-price coefficients were assumed to follow a normal distribution and the price coefficient was assumed to follow a log-normal distribution. Assuming lognormal distribution for the price coefficient is plausible from a behavioral perspective as it restricts all respondents to have negative price sensitivity. Additionally, this assumption guarantees that the resulting distributions of WTP are useful and meaningful (i.e., have finite moments) (Daly et al. 2012).

References
Daly, A., Hess, S., and Train, K. 2012. “Assuring Finite Moments for Willingness to Pay in Random Coefficient Models,” Transportation (39:1), pp. 19-31. Hess, S., Stathopoulos, A., and Daly, A. 2011. “Mixing of Behavioral Processes: A Modeling Framework and Three Case Studies,” paper presented at the 90th Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC, January 23-27 (number 11-2054). Revelt, D., and Train, K. 1998. “Mixed Logit with Repeated Choices: Households’ Choices of Appliance Efficiency Level,” Review of Economics and Statistics (80:4), pp. 647-657.

1

In our exercise, each respondent answered 12 choice situations.

MIS Quarterly Vol. 40 No. 3—Appendices/September 2016

A7

Copyright of MIS Quarterly is the property of MIS Quarterly and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

